The Old Cryptomeria Tree


      Although it was not the time of the morning when the temple bell was
usually rung, its heavy, regular gouging resounded through the village and
echoed far into the mountains. This was the day of reckoning, when Takuan's
time limit was up, and the villagers raced up the hill to find out whether he'd
done the impossible. The news that he had spread like wildfire.
     "Takezō's been captured!"
     "Really! Who got him?"
     "Takuan!"
     "I can't believe it! Without a weapon?"
     "It can't be true!"
      The crowd surged up to the Shippōji to gawk at the collared outlaw, who
was tied like an animal to the stair railing in front of the main sanctuary. Some
gulped and gasped at the sight, as though they were beholding the countenance
of the dreaded demon of Mount Ō e. As if to deflate their exaggerated reaction,
Takuan sat a bit farther up the stairs, leaning back on his elbows and grinning
amiably.
      "People of Miyamoto," he shouted, "now you can go back to your fields in
peace. The soldiers will be gone soon!"
      To the intimidated villagers, Takuan had become a hero overnight, their
savior and protector from evil. Some bowed deeply to him, their heads nearly
touching the ground of the temple courtyard; others pushed their way forward to
touch his hand or robe. Others knelt at his feet. Takuan, appalled at this display
of idolatry, pulled away from the mob and held up his hand for silence.
      "Listen, men and women of Miyamoto. I have something to say,
something important." The hue and cry died down. "It is not I who deserve the
credit for capturing Takezō. It was not I who accomplished it, but the law of
nature. Those who break it always lose in the end. It is the law that you should
respect."
     "Don't be ridiculous! You caught him, not nature!"
     "Don't be so modest, monk!"
     "We give credit where it's due!"
     "Forget the law. We have you to thank!"

       "Well, then thank me," continued Takuan. "I don't mind that. But you
should pay homage to the law. Anyway, what's done is done, and right now
there's something very important I'd like to ask you about. I need your help."
"What is it?" came the question from the curious crowd.
       "Just this: what shall we do with Takezō now that we've got him? My
agreement with the House of Ikeda's representative, who I'm sure you all know
by sight, was that if I didn't bring the fugitive back in three days' time, I'd hang
myself from that big cryptomeria. If I did succeed, I was promised, I could
decide his fate."
       People started to murmur.
       "We heard about that!"
       He assumed a judicial pose. "Well, then, what shall we do with him? As
you see, the dreaded monster is here in the flesh. Not very fearsome, really, is
he? In fact, he came along without a fight, the weakling. Shall we kill him, or let
him go?"
       There was a rumble of objections at the idea of setting Takezō free. One
man shouted, "We've got to kill him! He's no good, he's a criminal! If we let him
live, he'll be the curse of the village."
       While Takuan paused, seeming to consider the possibilities, angry,
impatient voices from the rear shouted, "Kill him! Kill him!"
       At that point, an old woman pushed her way to the front, shoving aside
men twice her size with sharp jabs of her elbows. It was, of course, the irate
Osugi. When she reached the steps, she glared at Takezō for a moment, then
turned and faced the villagers. Waving a mulberry branch in the air, she cried, "I
won't be satisfied with just killing him! Make him suffer first! Just look at that
hideous face!" Turning back to the prisoner, she raised her switch, screaming,
"You degenerate, loathsome creature!" and brought it down on him several
times, until she ran out of breath and her arm dropped to her side. Takezō
cringed in pain as Osugi turned to Takuan with a menacing look.
       "What do you want from me?" the monk asked.
       "It was because of this murderer that my son's life has been ruined."
Shaking violently, she screeched, "And without Matahachi there is no one to
carry on our family name."
       "Well," countered Takuan, "Matahachi, if you don't mind my saying so,
never amounted to much anyway. Won't you be better off in the long run taking
your son-in-law as heir? Giving him the honored Hon'iden name?"
       "How dare you say such a thing!" Suddenly the proud dowager burst into

sobs. "I don't care about what you think. Nobody understood him. He wasn't
really bad; he was my baby." Her fury rose again and she pointed at Takezō. "He
led him astray, he made him a good-for-nothing like himself. I have the right to
take my revenge." Addressing the crowd, she beseeched them, "Let me decide.
Leave it to me. I know what to do with him!"
       Just then a loud and angry shout from the back cut the old woman off. The
crowd parted like rent cloth, and the latecomer marched quickly to the front. It
was Scraggly Beard himself, in a towering rage.
       "What's going on here? This isn't a sideshow! All of you, get out of here.
Go back to work. Go home. Immediately!" There was shuffling, but no one
turned to go. "You heard what I said! Get a move on! What are you waiting for?"
He stepped threateningly toward them, his hand poised above his sword. Those
in the front shrank back wide-eyed.
       "No!" interrupted Takuan. "There's no reason for these good people to go. I
called them here for the express purpose of discussing what's to be done with
Takezō."
       "You be quiet!" commanded the captain. "You have nothing to say in this
matter." Drawing himself up and glaring first at Takuan, then at Osugi, and
finally at the crowd, he boomed, "This Shimmen Takezō has not only committed
grave and serious crimes against the laws of this province; he is also a fugitive
from Sekigahara. His punishment cannot be decided by the people. He must be
turned over to the government!"
       Takuan shook his head. "Nonsense!" Seeing that Scraggly Beard was ready
to respond, he raised a silencing finger. "That's not what you agreed to!"
       The captain, his dignity seriously threatened, started to argue. "Takuan,
you will no doubt receive the money the government has offered as a reward.
But as an official representative of Lord Terumasa, it is my duty to take charge
of the prisoner at this point. His fate need no longer be of any concern to you.
Don't trouble yourself even thinking about it."
       Takuan, making no effort to answer, broke into peals of laughter. Every
time it seemed to subside, it would come rolling up again.
       "Watch your manners, monk!" warned the captain. He started to spit and
sputter. "What's so funny? Huh? You think this is all a joke?"
       "My manners?" repeated Takuan, cracking up in laughter again. "My
manners? Look, Scraggly Beard, are you thinking of breaking our agreement,
going back on your sacred word? If you are, I warn you, I'll turn Takezō loose
here and now!"

        With a unanimous gasp, the villagers began edging away.
        "Ready?" asked Takuan, reaching toward the rope that bound Takezō. The
captain was speechless.
        "And when I unleash him, I'm going to sic him on you first. You can fight
it out between yourselves. Then arrest him, if you can!"
       "Now hold on—just a minute!"
       "I kept my part of the bargain." Takuan continued to make as if he were
       about to remove the prisoner's fetters.
       "Stop, I say." The samurai's forehead beaded with sweat.
       "Why?"
        "Well, because—because—" He was almost stuttering. "Now that he's tied
up, there's no point in letting him go, just to cause more trouble—now, is there?
I'll tell you what! You can kill Takezō yourself. Here—here's my sword. Just let
me have his head to take back with me. That's fair, isn't it?"
        "Give you his head! Not on your life! It's the business of the clergy to
conduct funerals, but giving away the corpses, or parts of them . . . Well, that'd
give us priests a bad name, wouldn't it? No one would trust us with their dead,
and anyway, if we started to just give them away, the temples would go broke in
no time." Even with the samurai's hand resting on his sword handle, Takuan
couldn't resist baiting him.
        Turning to the mob, the monk became serious again. "I ask you to talk it
over among yourselves and give me an answer. What shall we do? The old
woman says it's not enough to kill him outright, we should torture him first.
What do you think of lashing him to a branch of the cryptomeria tree for a few
days? We could bind him hand and foot, and he would be exposed to the
elements day and night. The crows will probably gouge out his eyeballs. How
does that sound?"
        His proposal struck his listeners as so inhumanly cruel that at first no one
could answer.
        Except Osugi, who said, "Takuan, this idea of yours shows what a wise
man you really are, but I think we should string him up for a week—no, more!
Let him hang there ten or twenty days. Then I myself will come and strike the
fatal blow."
        Without further ado, Takuan nodded. "All right. So be it!"
        He took hold of the rope after freeing it from the railing and dragged
Takezō, like a dog on a leash, to the tree. The prisoner went meekly, head
bowed, uttering not a sound. He seemed so repentant that some of the softer-

hearted members of the crowd felt a bit sorry for him. The excitement of
capturing the "wild beast" had hardly worn off, however, and with great gusto
everyone joined in the fun. Having tied several lengths of rope together, they
hoisted him up to a branch about thirty feet from the ground and lashed him
tightly. So bound, he looked less like a living man than a big straw doll.


       After Otsū came back to the temple from the mountains, she began feeling
a strange and intense melancholy whenever she was alone in her room. She
wondered why, since being alone was nothing new to her. And there were always
some people around the temple. She had all the comforts of home, yet felt
lonelier now than she had at any time during those three long days on the
desolate hillside with only Takuan as a companion. Sitting at the low table by her
window, her chin resting on her palms, she reflected on her feelings for half a
day before coming to a conclusion.
       She felt that this experience had given her an insight into her own heart.
Loneliness, she mused, is like hunger; it isn't outside but inside oneself. To be
lonely, she thought, is to sense that one lacks something, something vitally
necessary, but what she knew not.
       Neither the people around her nor the amenities of life at the temple could
assuage the feeling of isolation she now felt. In the mountains there had only
been the silence, the trees and the mist, but there had also been Takuan. It came
to her like a revelation that he was not entirely outside herself. His words had
gone straight to her heart, had warmed and lighted it as no fire or lamp could.
She then came to the innocent realization that she was lonely because Takuan
was not around.
       Having made this discovery, she stood up, but her mind still grappled with
the problem at hand. After deciding Takezō's punishment, Takuan had been
closeted in the guest room with the samurai from Himeji a good deal of the time.
What with having to go back and forth to the village on this errand and that, he'd
had no time to sit down and talk with her as he had in the mountains. Otsū sat
down again.
       If only she had a friend! She didn't need many; just one who knew her
well, someone she could lean on, someone strong and completely trustworthy.
That was what she longed for, craved so badly that she was nearly at her wit's
end.
       There was always, of course, her flute, but by the time a girl is sixteen,

there are questions and uncertainties inside her that can't be answered by a piece
of bamboo. She needed intimacy and a sense of partaking in, not just observing,
real life.
       "It's all so disgusting!" she said out loud, but voicing her feeling in no way
mitigated her hatred for Matahachi. Tears spilled onto the little lacquered table;
the angry blood coursing through her veins turned her temples blue. Her head
throbbed.
       Silently the door behind her slid open. In the temple kitchen, the fire for
the evening meal burned brightly.
       "Ah ha! So this is where you've been hiding! Sitting here letting the whole
day slip through your fingers!"
       The figure of Osugi appeared at the door. Startled out of her abstraction,
Otsū hesitated a moment before welcoming the old woman and putting a cushion
down for her to sit on. Without so much as a by-your-leave, Osugi seated herself.
       "My good daughter-in-law . . ." she began in grandiose tones.
       "Yes, ma'am," answered Otsū, cowed into bowing deeply before the old
harridan.
       "Now that you have acknowledged the relationship, there's a little
something I want to talk to you about. But first bring me some tea. I've been
talking till now with Takuan and the samurai from Himeji, and the acolyte here
didn't even serve us refreshments. I'm parched!"
       Otsū obeyed and brought her some tea.
       "I want to talk about Matahachi," the old woman said without prelude. "Of
course, I'd be a fool to believe anything that lying Takezō says, but it seems
Matahachi is alive and staying in a different province."
       "Is that so?" said Otsū coldly.
       "I can't be sure, but the fact remains that the priest here, acting as your
guardian, agreed to your marriage to my son, and the Hon'iden family has
already accepted you as his bride. Whatever happens in the future, I trust you
don't have any ideas about going back on your word."
      "Well . . ."
      "You'd never do such a thing, would you?"
      Otsū let out a soft sigh.
       "All right then, I'm glad of that!" She spoke as though adjourning a
meeting. "You know how people talk, and there's no telling when Matahachi will
be back, so I want you to leave this temple and come live with me. I've more
work than I can handle, and since my daughter-in-law's got so much on her

hands with her own family, I can't drive her too hard. So I need your help."
      "But I—"
      "Who else but Matahachi's bride could come into the Hon'iden house?" "I
don't know, but—"
      "Are you trying to say you don't want to come? Don't you like the idea of
living under my roof? Most girls would jump at the chance!"
     "No, it's not that. It's—"
     "Well, then, stop dawdling! Get your things together!"
     "Right now? Wouldn't it be better to wait?"
     "Wait for what?"
     "Until . . . until Matahachi comes back."
      "Absolutely not!" Her tone was final. "You just might start getting ideas in
your head about other men before that. It's my duty to see that you don't
misbehave. In the meantime, I'll also see that you learn how to do field work,
care for the silkworms, sew a straight seam and act like a lady."
      "Oh. I . . . see." Otsū had no strength to protest. Her head still pounded and
with all this talk of Matahachi, her chest tightened. She feared saying another
word lest she release a torrent of tears.
      "And there's one other thing," said Osugi. Heedless of the girl's distress,
she raised her head imperiously. "I'm still not quite sure what that unpredictable
monk plans to do with Takezō. It worries me. I want you to keep a sharp eye on
the two of them until we're sure Takezō is dead. At night as well as in the
daytime. If you don't take special care at night, there's no telling what Takuan
might do. They may be in cahoots!"
      "So you don't mind if I stay here?"
      "For the time being, no, since you can't be in two places at once, can you?
You will come with your belongings to the Hon'iden house the day that Takezō's
head is separated from his body. Understand?"
      "Yes, I understand."
      "Make sure you don't forget!" Osugi barked as she whooshed out of the
room.
      Thereupon, as though waiting for the chance, a shadow appeared on the
paper-covered window and a male voice called softly, "Otsū! Otsū!"
      Hoping it was Takuan, she hardly looked at the shape of the shadow before
rushing to open the window. When she did, she jerked back in surprise, for the
eyes meeting hers were the captain's. He reached through, grabbing her hand and
squeezing it hard.

       "You've been kind to me," he said, "but I've just received orders from
Himeji to go back."
       "Why, that's too bad." She tried to pull her hand from his, but the grip was
too firm.
       "They seem to be conducting an investigation into the incident here," he
explained. "If only I had Takezō's head, I could say I had discharged my duty
with honor. I'd be vindicated. That crazy, stubborn Takuan won't let me take it.
He won't listen to anything I say. But I think you're on my side; that's why I've
come here. Take this letter, will you, and read it later, somewhere where no one
will see you?"
       He pressed the letter into her hand and was off in a shot. She could hear
him hurriedly walking down the steps to the road.
       It was more than a letter, for a large gold piece was enclosed. But the
message itself was straightforward enough: it asked Otsū to cut off Takezō's
head within the next few days and bring it to Himeji, where the writer would
make her his wife, and she would live amid wealth and glory for the rest of her
days. The missive was signed "Aoki Tanzaemon," a name that, according to the
writer's own testimony, belonged to one of the most celebrated warriors of the
region. She wanted to burst out laughing, but was too indignant.
      As she finished reading, Takuan called, "Otsū, have you eaten yet?"
      Slipping her feet into her sandals, she went out to talk with him.
      "I don't feel like eating. I have a headache."
      "What's that in your hand?"
      "A letter."
      "Another one?"
      "Yes."
      "From whom?"
      "Takuan, you're so nosy!"
      "Curious, my girl, inquisitive. Not nosy!"
      "Would you like to have a look at it?"
      "If you don't mind."
      "Just to pass the time?"
      "That's as good a reason as any."
      "Here. I don't mind at all."
       Otsū handed him the letter, and after reading it, Takuan laughed heartily.
She couldn't help but let the corners of her mouth turn up too.
       "That poor man! He's so desperate he's trying to bribe you with both love

and money. This letter is hilarious! I must say, our world is fortunate indeed to
be blessed with such outstanding, upright samurai! He's so brave he asks a mere
girl to do his beheading for him. And so stupid as to put it in writing."
       "The letter doesn't bother me," said Otsū, "but what am I going to do with
the money?" She handed Takuan the gold piece.
      "This is worth quite a lot," he said, weighing it in his hand.
      "That's what bothers me."
      "Don't worry. I never have any trouble disposing of money."
       Takuan walked around to the front of the temple, where there was an alms
box. Preparing to toss the coin in, he touched it to his forehead in deference to
the Buddha. Then he changed his mind. "On second thought, you keep it. I
daresay it won't be in the way."
       "I don't want it. It'll just cause trouble. I might be questioned about it later.
I'd rather just pretend I never saw it."
       "This gold, Otsū, no longer belongs to Aoki Tanzaemon. It has become an
offering to the Buddha, and the Buddha has bestowed it on you. Keep it for good
luck."
       Without further protest, Otsū tucked the coin into her obi; then, looking up
at the sky, she remarked, "Windy, isn't it? I wonder if it'll rain tonight. It hasn't
rained for ages."
       "Spring's almost over, so we're due for a good downpour. We need it to
wash away all the dead flowers, not to mention relieving the people's boredom."
      "But if it's a heavy rain, what'll happen to Takezō?"
      "Hmm. Takezō . . ." the monk mused.
      Just as the two of them turned toward the cryptomeria, a call came from its
      upper branches.
      "Takuan! Takuan!"
      "What? Is that you, Takezō?"
       As Takuan squinted to look up into the tree, Takezō hurled down a stream
of imprecations. "You swine of a monk! You filthy impostor! Come and stand
under here! I have something to say to you!"
       The wind was beating at the tree's branches violently, and the voice came
through broken and disjointed. Leaves swirled around the tree and onto Takuan's
upturned face.
       The monk laughed. "I see you're still full of life. That's okay; that suits me
fine. I hope it's not just the false vitality that comes from the knowledge that
you're soon going to die."

       "Shut up!" cried Takezō, who was not so much full of life as full of anger.
"If I were afraid to die, why would I have just kept still while you tied me up?"
       "You did that because I am strong and you are weak!"
       "That's a lie, and you know it!"
       "Then I'll put it another way. I'm clever, and you are unspeakably stupid!"
"You might be right. It was certainly stupid of me to let you catch me." "Don't
squirm so much, monkey in the tree! It won't do you any good, it'll
      make you bleed if you've any blood left, and frankly, it's quite
      unbecoming." "Listen, Takuan!"
      "I'm listening."
      "If I had wanted to fight you on the mountain, I could've easily squashed
      you under one foot like a cucumber."
       "That's not a very flattering analogy. In any case you didn't, so you'd be
better off leaving that line of thought. Forget about what happened. It's too late
for regrets."
       "You tricked me with your high-sounding priest talk. That was pretty
mean, you bastard. You got me to trust you and you betrayed me. I let you
capture me, yes, but only because I thought you were different from the others. I
never thought I'd be humiliated like this."
       "Get to the point, Takezō," Takuan said impatiently.
       "Why are you doing this to me?" the straw bundle shrieked. "Why don't
you just cut off my head and get it over with! I thought that if I had to die, it'd be
better to let you choose how to execute me than let that bloodthirsty mob do it.
Although you are a monk, you also claim to understand the Way of the
Samurai."
       "Oh, I do, you poor misguided boy. Much better than you!"
       "I would've been better off letting the villagers catch up with me. At least
they're human."
       "Was that your only mistake, Takezō? Hasn't just about everything you've
ever done been some kind of mistake? While you're resting up there, why don't
you try thinking about the past a little."
       "Oh, shut up, you hypocrite! I'm not ashamed! Matahachi's mother can call
me anything she wants, but he is my friend, my best friend. I considered it my
responsibility to come and tell the old hag what happened to him and what does
she do? She tries to incite that mob to torture me! Bringing her news of her
precious son was the only reason I broke through the barrier and came here. Is
that a violation of the warrior's code?"

       "That's not the point, you imbecile! The trouble with you is that you don't
even know how to think. You seem to be under the misconception that if you
perform one brave deed, that alone makes you a samurai. Well, it doesn't! You
let that one act of loyalty convince you of your righteousness. The more
convinced you became, the more harm you caused yourself and everyone else.
And now where are you? Caught in a trap you set for yourself, that's where!" He
paused. "By the way, how's the view from up there, Takezō?"
       "You pig! I won't forget this!"
       "You'll forget everything soon. Before you turn into dried meat, Takezō,
take a good look at the wide world around you. Gaze out onto the world of
human beings, and change your selfish way of thinking. And then, when you
arrive in that other world beyond and are reunited with your ancestors, tell them
that just before you died a man named Takuan Sōhō told you this. They'll be
overjoyed to learn you had such excellent guidance, even if you did learn what
life was all about too late to bring anything but shame to your family name."
       Otsū, who had been standing transfixed some distance away, came running
forward and attacked Takuan in shrill tones.
       "You're carrying this too far, Takuan! I've been listening. I heard
everything. How can you be so cruel to someone who can't even defend himself?
You're a religious man, or you're supposed to be! Takezō's telling the truth when
he says he trusted you and let you take him without a struggle."
       "Now what's all this? Is my comrade in arms turning against me?"
       "Have a heart, Takuan! When I hear you talk like that, I hate you, I really
do. If you intend to kill him, then kill him and be done with it! Takezō is
resigned to dying. Let him die in peace!" She was so outraged she grabbed
frantically at Takuan's chest.
       "Be quiet!" he said with uncharacteristic brutality. "Women know nothing
of these matters. Hold your tongue, or I'll hang you up there with him."
       "No, I won't, I won't!" she screamed. "I should have a chance to speak too.
Didn't I go to the mountains with you and stay there three days and three
nights?"
      "That has nothing to do with it. Takuan Sōhō will punish Takezō as he sees
      fit."
      "So punish him! Kill him! Now. It's not right for you to ridicule his misery
      while he's lying up there half dead."
      "That happens to be my only weakness, ridiculing fools like him." "It's
      inhuman!"

      "Get out of here, now! Go away, Otsū; leave me alone."
      "I will not!"
      "Stop being so stubborn," Takuan shouted, giving Otsū a hard shove with
      his elbow.
       When she recovered, she was slumped against the tree. She pressed her
face and chest to its trunk and began wailing. She had never dreamed Takuan
could be so cruel. The people in the village believed that even if the monk had
Takezō tied up for a while, eventually he'd soften and lighten the punishment.
Now Takuan had admitted that it was his "weakness" to enjoy seeing Takezō
suffer! Otsū shuddered at the savagery of men.
       If even Takuan, whom she'd trusted so deeply, could become heartless,
then the whole world must indeed be evil beyond comprehension. And if there
was no one at all whom she could trust .. .
       She felt a curious warmth in this tree, felt somehow that through its great,
ancient trunk, so thick that ten men with arms outstretched could not encompass
it, there coursed the blood of Takezō, flowing down into it from his precarious
prison in the upper branches.
       How like a samurai's son he was! How courageous! When Takuan had first
tied him up, and again just now, she had seen Takezō's weaker side. He, too, was
able to weep. Until now, she'd gone along with the opinion of the crowd, been
swayed by it, without having any real idea of the man himself. What was there
about him that made people hate him like a demon and hunt him down like a
beast?
       Her back and shoulders heaved with her sobs. Clinging tightly to the tree
trunk, she rubbed her tear-stained cheeks against the bark. The wind whistled
loudly through the upper branches, which were waving broadly to and fro. Large
raindrops fell on her kimono neck and flowed down her back, chilling her spine.
       "Come on, Otsū," Takuan shouted, covering his head with his hands.
"We'll get soaked."
       She didn't even answer.
       "It's all your fault, Otsū! You're a crybaby! You start weeping, the heavens
weep too." Then, the teasing tone gone from his voice: "The wind's getting
stronger, and it looks like we're in for a big storm, so let's get inside. Don't waste
your tears on a man who's going to die anyway! Come on!" Takuan, sweeping
the skirt of his kimono up over his head, ran toward the shelter of the temple.
       Within seconds it was pouring, the raindrops making little white spots as
they pummeled the ground. Though the water was streaming down her back,

Otsū didn't budge. She couldn't tear herself away, even after her drenched
kimono was clinging to her skin and she was chilled to the marrow. When her
thoughts turned to Takezō, the rain ceased to matter. It didn't occur to her to
wonder why she should suffer simply because he was suffering; her mind was
consumed by a newly formed image of what a man should be. She silently
prayed his life would be spared.
       She wandered in circles round the foot of the tree, looking up to Takezō
often, but unable to see him because of the storm. Without thinking, she called
his name, but there was no answer. A suspicion arose in her mind that he might
regard her as a member of the Hon'iden family, or as just another hostile villager.
       "If he stays out in this rain," she thought in despair, "he's sure to die before
morning. Oh, isn't there anyone in the world who can save him?"
       She started running at full speed, partially propelled by the raging wind.
Behind the main temple, the kitchen building and the priests' quarters were
tightly shuttered. Water overflowing from the roof gutters slashed deep gullies in
the ground as it rushed downhill.
      "Takuan!" she screamed. She'd reached the door of his room, and began
      banging on it with all her strength.
      "Who is it?" came his voice from within.
      "It's me—Otsū!"
       "What are you doing still out there?" He quickly opened the door and
looked at her in astonishment. Despite the building's long eaves, rain showered
in on him. "Come inside quick!" he exclaimed, making a grab for her arm, but
she pulled back.
       "No. I came to ask a favor, not to dry off. I beg you, Takuan, take him
down from that tree!"
       "What? I'll do no such thing!" he said adamantly.
       "Oh, please, Takuan, you must. I'd be grateful to you forever." She fell on
her knees in the mud and lifted her hands in supplication. "It doesn't matter about
me, but you must help him! Please! You can't just let him die—you can't!"
       The sound of the torrent nearly blotted out her tearful voice. With her
hands still raised before her, she looked like a Buddhist practicing austerities by
standing under a freezing waterfall.
       "I bow before you, Takuan. I beg you. I'll do anything you ask, but please
save him!"
       Takuan was silent. His eyes were tightly closed, like the doors to the shrine
where a secret Buddha is kept. Heaving a deep sigh, he opened them and

breathed fire.
      "Go to bed! This minute! You're weak to begin with, and being out in this
      weather is suicidal."
      "Oh, please, please," she pleaded, reaching for the door.
      "I'm going to bed. I advise you to do the same." His voice was like ice. The
      door slammed shut.
       Still, she would not give up. She crawled under the house till she reached
the spot she guessed was beneath where he slept. She called up to him:
       "Please! Takuan, it's the most important thing in the world to me! Takuan,
can you hear me? Answer me, please! You're a monster! A heartless, cold-
blooded fiend!"
       For a while, the monk listened patiently without replying, but she was
making it impossible for him to sleep. Finally, in a fit of temper, he jumped out
of bed, shouting, "Help! Thief! There's a thief under my floor. Catch him!"
       Otsū scrambled out into the storm again and retired in defeat. But she was
not finished yet.
