The Rock and the Tree


       By early morning, wind and rain had washed spring away without a trace.
A throbbing sun beat down furiously and few villagers walked around without a
wide-brimmed hat for protection.
       Osugi made her way uphill to the temple, arriving at Takuan's door thirsty
and breathless. Beads of sweat emerged from her hairline, converged in rivulets
and coursed straight down her righteous nose. She took no notice of this, for she
was brimming over with curiosity about her victim's fate.
      "Takuan," she called, "did Takezō survive the storm?"
      The monk appeared on his veranda. "Oh, it's you. Terrific downpour, wasn't
      it?"
      "Yes." She smiled crookedly. "It was murderous."
       "I'm sure you know, however, that it isn't very difficult to live through a
night or two of even the heaviest rain. The human body can take a lot of
buffeting. It's the sun that's really deadly."
       "You don't mean he's still alive?" said Osugi in disbelief, at once turning
her wrinkled face toward the old cryptomeria. Her needlelike eyes squinted in
the glare. She raised a hand to shield them and in a moment relaxed a bit. "He's
just drooping up there like a wet rag," she said with renewed hope. "He can't
have any life left in him, he can't."
       "I don't see any crows picking at his face yet." Takuan smiled. "I think that
means he's still breathing."
       "Thank you for telling me. A man of learning like you must surely know
more than I do about such matters." She craned her neck and peered around him
into the building. "I don't see my daughter-in-law anywhere. Would you please
call her for me?"
      "Your daughter-in-law? I don't believe I've ever met her. In any case, I don't
      know her name. How can I call her?"
      "Call her, I say!" Osugi repeated impatiently.
      "Who on earth are you talking about?"
      "Why, Otsū, of course!"
      "Otsū! Why do you call her your daughter-in-law? She hasn't entered the
      Hon'iden family, has she?"

       "No, not yet, but I plan to take her in very soon as Matahachi's bride."
"That's hard to imagine. How can she marry someone when he's not around?"
       Osugi became more indignant. "Look, you vagabond! This has nothing to
do with you! Just tell me where Otsū is!"
       "I imagine she's still in bed."
       "Oh, yes, I should've thought of that," the old woman muttered, half to
herself. "I did tell her to watch Takezō nights, so she must become pretty tired by
daybreak. Incidentally," she said accusingly, "aren't you supposed to be watching
him during the day?"
       Without waiting for an answer, she did an about-face and marched under
the tree. There she stared upward for a long time, as if in a trance. When it
finally broke, she plodded off toward the village, mulberry stick in hand.
       Takuan returned to his room, where he stayed until evening.
       Otsū's room was not far from his, in the same building. Her door was also
closed all day except when opened by the acolyte, who several times brought her
medicine or an earthenware pot full of thick rice gruel. When they had found her
half dead in the rain the night before, they'd had to drag her in kicking and
screaming and force her to swallow some tea. The priest had then given her a
severe scolding while she sat mutely propped against a wall. By morning she had
a high fever and was hardly able to lift her head to drink the gruel.
       Night fell, and in sharp contrast to the previous evening, a bright moon
shone like a clearly cut hole in the sky. When everyone else was sound asleep,
Takuan put down the book he was reading, slipped into his wooden clogs and
went out into the yard.
      "Takezō!" he called.
      High above him a branch shook and glistening dewdrops fell.
      "Poor boy, I guess he doesn't have the strength to reply," Takuan said to
      himself. "Takezō! Takezō!"
      "What do you want, you bastard of a monk?" came the ferocious response.
       Takuan was seldom taken off guard, but he could not conceal his surprise.
"You certainly howl loudly for a man at death's door. Sure you're not really a fish
or some kind of sea monster? At this rate you ought to last another five or six
days. By the way, how's your stomach? Empty enough for you?"
       "Forget the small talk, Takuan. Just cut my head off and get it over with."
       "Oh, no! Not so fast! One has to be careful about things like that. If I cut
your head off right now, it'd probably fly down and try to bite me." Takuan's
voice trailed off and he stared at the sky. "What a beautiful moon! You're lucky

to be able to view it from such an excellent vantage point."
       "Okay, just watch me, you filthy mongrel of a monk! I'll show you what I
can do if I put my mind to it!" With every ounce of strength in him, Takezō then
began to shake himself violently, flinging his weight up and down and nearly
breaking off the branch he was bound to. Bark and leaves rained down on the
man below, who remained unruffled but perhaps a bit affectedly nonchalant.
       The monk calmly brushed his shoulders clean, and when he was finished
he looked up again. "That's the spirit, Takezō! It's good to get as angry as you are
now. Go ahead! Feel your strength to the fullest, show you're a real man, show
us what you're made of! People these days think it's a sign of wisdom and
character to be able to control their anger, but I say they're foolish. I hate seeing
the young being so restrained, so proper. They have more spirit than their elders
and they should show it. Don't hold back, Takezō! The madder you get, the
better!"
       "Just wait, Takuan, just wait! If I have to chew through this rope with my
bare teeth, I will, just to get my hands on you and tear you limb from limb!"
       "Is that a promise or a threat? If you really think you can do it, I'll stay
down here and wait. Are you sure you can keep it up without killing yourself
before the rope breaks?"
       "Shut up!" Takezō screamed hoarsely.
       "Say, Takezō, you really are strong! The whole tree is swaying. But I don't
notice the earth shaking, sorry to say. You know, the trouble with you is that, in
reality, you're weak. Your kind of anger is nothing more than personal malice. A
real man's anger is an expression of moral indignation. Anger over petty
emotional trifles is for women, not men."
       "It won't be long now," he threatened. "I'll go straight for the neck!"
       Takezō struggled on, but the thick rope showed no sign of weakening.
Takuan looked on for a time, then offered some friendly advice. "Why don't you
cut that out, Takezō—you're getting nowhere. You'll just wear yourself out, and
what good is that going to do you? Squirm and wriggle all you like, you couldn't
break a single branch of this tree, much less make a dent in the universe."
       Takezō gave out a mighty groan. His tantrum was over. He realized the
monk was right.
       "I daresay all that strength would be put to better use working for the good
of the country. You really should try doing something for others, Takezō,
although it is a little late to start now. If you'd just tried, you'd have had a chance
at moving the gods or even the universe, not to mention plain, everyday people."

Takuan's voice took on a slightly pontifical tone. "It's a pity, a great pity! Though
you were born human, you're more like an animal, no better than a boar or wolf.
How sad it is that a handsome young man like you has to meet his end here,
without ever having become truly human! What a waste!"
      "You call yourself human?" Takezō spat.
      "Listen, you barbarian! All along you've had too much confidence in your
own brute strength, thinking you didn't have a match in the world. But look
where you are now!"
      "I've got nothing to be ashamed of. It wasn't a fair fight."
      "In the long run, Takezō, it doesn't make any difference. You were
outwitted and outtalked instead of being out-pummeled. When you've lost,
you've lost. And whether you like it or not, I'm sitting on this rock and you're
lying up there helpless. Can't you see the difference between you and me!"
      "Yeah. You fight dirty. You're a liar and a coward!"
      "It would have been crazy of me to try to take you by force. You're too
strong physically. A human being doesn't have much chance wrestling a tiger.
Luckily, he rarely has to, being the more intelligent of the two. Not many people
would argue with the fact that tigers are inferior to humans."
      Takezō gave no indication that he was still listening.
      "It's the same with your so-called courage. Your conduct up till now gives
no evidence that it's anything more than animal courage, the kind that has no
respect for human values and life. That's not the kind of courage that makes a
samurai. True courage knows fear. It knows how to fear that which should be
feared. Honest people value life passionately, they hang on to it like a precious
jewel. And they pick the right time and place to surrender it, to die with dignity."
      Still no answer.
      "That's what I meant when I said it's a pity about you. You were born with
physical strength and fortitude, but you lack both knowledge and wisdom. While
you managed to master a few of the more unfortunate features of the Way of the
Samurai, you made no effort to acquire learning or virtue. People talk about
combining the Way of Learning with the Way of the Samurai, but when properly
combined, they aren't two—they're one. Only one Way, Takezō."
      The tree was as silent as the rock on which Takuan sat. The darkness, too,
was still. After several moments, Takuan rose slowly and deliberately. "Think
about it one more night, Takezō. After you do, I'll cut off your head for you." He
started walking away, taking long, thoughtful strides, his head bowed. He hadn't
gone more than twenty paces when Takezō's voice rang out urgently.

       "Wait!"
       Takuan turned and called back, "What do you want now?"
       "Come back."
       "Mm. Don't tell me you want to hear more? Could it be that at last you're
       beginning to think?"
        "Takuan! Save me!" Takezō's cry for help was loud and plaintive. The
branch began to tremble, as though it, as though the whole tree, were weeping.
        "I want to be a better man. I realize now how important it is, what a
privilege it is to be born human. I'm almost dead, but I understand what it means
to be alive. And now that I know, my whole life will consist of being tied to this
tree! I can't undo what I've done."
        "You're finally coming to your senses. For the first time in your life, you're
talking like a human being."
        "I don't want to die," Takezō cried. "I want to live. I want to go out, try
again, do everything right this time." His body convulsed with his sobbing.
"Takuan . . . please! Help me . . . help me!"
        The monk shook his head. "Sorry, Takezō. It's out of my hands. It's the law
of nature. You can't do things over again. That's life. Everything in it is for
keeps. Everything! You can't put your head back on after the enemy's cut it off.
That's the way it is. Of course, I feel sorry for you, but I can't undo that rope,
because it wasn't me who tied it. It was you. All I can do is give you some
advice. Face death bravely and quietly. Say a prayer and hope someone bothers
to listen. And for the sake of your ancestors, Takezō, have the decency to die
with a peaceful look on your face!"
        The clatter of Takuan's sandals faded into the distance. He was gone, and
Takezō cried out no more. Following the spirit of the monk's advice, he shut the
eyes that had just experienced a great awakening and forgot everything. He
forgot about living and about dying, and under the myriad tiny stars lay perfectly
still as the night breeze sighed through the tree. He was cold, very cold.
        After a while, he sensed that someone was at the base of the tree. Whoever
it was was clutching the broad trunk and trying frantically but not very adroitly
to climb up to the lowest branch. Takezō could hear the climber slipping
downward after almost every upward advance. He could also hear chips of bark
falling to the ground and was sure that the hands were being skinned much
worse than the tree was. But the climber kept at it doggedly, digging into the tree
again and again until finally the first branch was within reach. Then the form
rose with relative ease to where Takezō, barely distinguishable from the branch

he was stretched on, lay depleted of every ounce of strength. A panting voice
whispered his name.
       With great difficulty he opened his eyes and found himself face to face
with a veritable skeleton; only the eyes were alive and vibrant. The face spoke.
"It's me!" it said with childlike simplicity.
      "Otsū?"
      "Yes, me. Oh, Takezō, let's run away! I heard you scream out that you
      wanted with all your heart to live."
      "Run away? You'll untie me, set me free?"
       "Yes. I can't stand this village anymore either. If I stay here—oh, I don't
even want to think about it. I have my reasons. I just want to get out of this
stupid, cruel place. I'll help you, Takezō! We can help each other." Otsū was
already wearing traveling clothes, and all her worldly possessions hung from her
shoulder in a small fabric bag.
       "Quick, cut the rope! What are you waiting for? Cut it!"
       "It won't take a minute."
       She unsheathed a small dagger and in no time severed the captive's bonds.
Several minutes passed before the tingling in his limbs eased and he could flex
his muscles. She tried to support his entire weight, with the result that when he
slipped, she went down with him. The two bodies clung to each other, bounced
off a limb, twisted in the air and crashed to the ground.
       Takezō stood up. Dazed from the thirty-foot fall and numbingly weak, he
nevertheless planted his feet firmly on the earth. Otsū writhed in pain on her
hands and knees.
      "O-o-h-h," she moaned.
      Putting his arms around her, he helped her up.
      "Do you think you broke something?"
      "I have no idea, but I think I can walk."
      "We had all those branches to break the fall, so you're probably not too
      badly hurt."
      "What about you? You okay?"
       "Yes . . . I'm . . . I'm okay. I'm . . . " He paused a second or two, then
blurted out, "I'm alive! I'm really alive!"
       "Of course you are!"
       "It's not 'of course."'
       "Let's get out of here fast. If anybody finds us here, we'll be in real
trouble." Otsū started limping away and Takezō followed . . . slowly, silently,

like two frail wounded insects walking on the autumn frost.
       They proceeded as best they could, hobbling along in silence, a silence
broken only much later, when Otsū cried, "Look! It's getting light over toward
Harima."
      "Where are we?"
      "At the top of Nakayama Pass."
      "Have we really come that far?"
       "Yes." Otsū smiled weakly. "Surprising what you can do when you're
determined. But, Takezō ." Otsū looked alarmed. "You must be famished. You
haven't eaten anything for days."
       At the mention of food, Takezō suddenly realized his shrunken stomach
was cramped with pain. Now that he was aware of it, it was excruciating, and it
seemed like hours before Otsū managed to undo her bag and take out the food.
Her gift of life took the form of rice cakes, stuffed generously with sweet bean
paste. As their sweetness slid smoothly down his throat, Takezō grew giddy. The
fingers holding the cake shook. "I'm alive," he thought over and over, vowing
that from that moment on he'd live a very different sort of life.
       The reddish clouds of morning turned their cheeks rosy. As he began to see
Otsū's face more clearly and hunger gave way to a sated calm, it seemed like a
dream that he was sitting here safe and sound with her.
      "When it gets light, we'll have to be very careful. We're almost at the
      provincial border," said Otsū.
      Takezō's eyes widened. "The border! That's right, I forgot. I have to go to
      Hinagura."
      "Hinagura? Why?"
      "That's where they've got my sister locked up. I have to get her out of there.
      Guess I'll have to say good-bye."
       Otsū peered into his face in stunned silence. "If that's the way you feel
about it, go! But if I'd thought you were going to desert me, I wouldn't have left
Miyamoto."
       "What else can I do? Just leave her there in the stockade?"
       With a look that pressed in on him, she took his hand in hers. Her face, her
whole body, was aflame with passion. "Takezō," she pleaded, "I'll tell you how I
feel about this later, when there's time, but please, don't leave me alone here!
Take me with you, wherever you go!"
       "But I can't!"
       "Remember"—she gripped his hand tight—"whether you like it or not, I'm

staying with you. If you think I'll be in the way when you're trying to rescue
Ogin, then I'll go to Himeji and wait."
     "All right, do that," he agreed instantly.
     "You'll definitely come, won't you?"
     "Of course."
       "I'll be waiting at Hanada Bridge, just outside Himeji. I'll wait for you
there, whether it takes a hundred days or a thousand."
       Answering with a slight nod, Takezō was off without further ado, racing
along the ridge leading from the pass into the far-distant mountains. Otsū raised
her head to watch him till his body melted into the scenery.


      Back in the village, Osugi's grandson came charging up to the Hon'iden
manor house, shouting, "Grandma! Grandma!"
      Wiping his nose with the back of his hand, he peered into the kitchen and
said excitedly, "Grandma, have you heard? Something awful's happened!"
      Osugi, who was standing before the stove, coaxing a fire with a bamboo
fan, barely looked his way. "What's all the fuss about?",
     "Grandma, don't you know? Takezō's escaped!"
     "Escaped!" She dropped the fan in the flames. "What are you talking
     about?"
     "This morning he wasn't in the tree. The rope was cut."
     "Heita, you know what I said about telling tales!"
     "It's the truth, Grandma, honest. Everybody's talking about it." "Are you
     absolutely sure?"
     "Yes, ma'am. And up at the temple, they're searching for Otsū. She's gone
     too. Everybody's running around shouting."
      The visible effect of the news was colorful. Osugi's face whitened shade
by shade as the flames of her burning fan turned from red to blue to violet. Her
face soon seemed drained of all blood, so much so that Heita shrank in fear.
      "Heita!"
      "Yes?"
      "Run as fast as your legs can carry you. Fetch your daddy right away. Then
go down to the riverbank and get Uncle Gon! And hurry!" Osugi's voice
quivered.
      Before Heita even reached the gate, a crowd of muttering villagers had
arrived. Among them were Osugi's son-in-law, Uncle Gon, other relatives and a

number of tenants.
      "That girl Otsū's run away too, hasn't she?"
      "And Takuan's not around either!"
      "Looks pretty funny if you ask me!"
      "They were in it together, that's for sure."
      "Wonder what the old woman'll do? Her family honor's at stake!"
       The son-in-law and Uncle Gon, carrying lances passed down to them from
their ancestors, stared blankly toward the house. Before they could do anything,
they needed guidance, so they stood there restlessly waiting for Osugi to appear
and issue orders.
       "Granny," someone finally shouted, "haven't you heard the news?"
       "I'll be there in a minute," came the reply. "All of you, just be quiet and
wait."
       Osugi quickly rose to the occasion. When she'd realized the awful news
had to be true, her blood boiled, but she managed to control herself enough to
kneel before the family altar. After silently saying a prayer of supplication, she
raised her head, opened her eyes and turned around. Calmly she opened the
doors of the sword chest, pulled out a drawer and withdrew a treasured weapon.
Having already donned attire suitable for a manhunt, she slipped the short sword
in her obi and went to the entranceway, where she tied her sandal thongs
securely round her ankles.
       The awed hush that greeted her as she approached the gate made clear they
knew what she was dressed for. The stubborn old woman meant business and
was more than ready to avenge the insult to her house.
       "Everything's going to be all right," she announced in clipped tones. "I'm
going to chase down that shameless hussy myself and see to it she receives her
proper punishment." Her jaw clamped shut.
       She was already walking briskly down the road before someone in the
crowd spoke up. "If the old woman is going, we should go too." All the relatives
and tenants stood up, and fell in behind their doughty matriarch. Arming
themselves as they went with sticks, fashioning bamboo lances hastily as they
walked, they marched directly to Nakayama Pass, not even pausing to rest on the
way. They reached it just before noon, only to find that they were too late.
       "We've let them get away!" one man shouted. The crowd seethed with
anger. To add to their frustration, a border official approached to inform them
such a large group could not pass through.
       Uncle Gon came forward and pleaded earnestly with the official,

describing Takezō as a "criminal," Otsū as "evil" and Takuan as "crazy." "If we
drop this matter now," he explained, "it will sully the name of our ancestors.
We'll never be able to hold up our heads. We'll be the laughingstock of the
village. The Hon'iden family might even have to abandon its land."
       The official said he understood their predicament but could do nothing to
help. The law's the law. He could perhaps send an inquiry on to Himeji and get
them special permission to cross the border, but that would take time.
       Osugi, after conferring with her relatives and tenants, stepped in front of
the official and asked, "In that case, is there any reason why two of us, myself
and Uncle Gon, can't go through?"
       "Up to five people are permitted."
       Osugi nodded her acquiescence. Then, although it looked as if she was
about to deliver a moving farewell, she instead called her followers together in a
very matter-of-fact way. They lined up before her, staring attentively at her thin-
lipped mouth and large protruding teeth.
       When they were all quiet, she said, "There's no reason for you to be upset.
I anticipated something like this happening before we even set out. When I put
on this short sword, one of the most prized Hon'iden heirlooms, I knelt before
our ancestors' memorial tablets and bade them a formal farewell. I also made two
vows.
       "One was that I would overtake and punish the brazen female who has
smeared our name with mud. The other was that I'd find out for sure, even if I
died trying, whether my son Matahachi is alive. And if he is, I'll bring him home
to carry on the family name. I swore to do this, and I will do it, even if it means
tying a rope around his neck and dragging him all the way back. He has an
obligation not only to me and to those departed, but to you as well. He will then
find a wife a hundred times better than Otsū and blot out this disgrace for all
time, so that the villagers will once again recognize our house as a noble and
honorable one."
       As they were applauding and cheering, one man uttered something
sounding like a groan. Osugi stared fixedly at her son-in-law.
       "Now Uncle Gon and I," she went on, "are both old enough to retire. We
are both in agreement on everything I've vowed to do, and he, too, is resolved to
accomplish them, even if it means spending two or three years doing nothing
else, even if it means walking the length and breadth of the country. While I'm
gone, my son-in-law will take my place as head of the house. During that time,
you must promise to work as hard as ever. I don't want to hear of any of you

neglecting the silkworms or letting weeds grow wild in the fields. Do you
understand?"
       Uncle Gon was nearly fifty, Osugi ten years older. The crowd seemed
hesitant to let them go it alone, since they were obviously no match for Takezō
in the event that they should ever find him. They all imagined him to be a
madman who would attack and kill for the smell of blood alone.
       "Wouldn't it be better," someone suggested, "if you took three young men
along with you? The man said that five can pass through."
       The old woman shook her head with vehemence. "I don't need any help. I
never have, and never will. Ha! Everyone thinks Takezō is so strong, but he
doesn't scare me! He's only a brat, with not much more hair on him than when I
knew him as a baby. I'm not his equal in physical strength, of course, but I
haven't lost my wits. I can still outsmart an enemy or two. Uncle Gon's not senile
yet either.
       "Now I've told you what I'm going to do," she said, pointing her index
finger at her nose. "And I'm going to do it. There's nothing left for you to do but
go home, so go and take care of everything till we return."
       She shooed them away and walked up to the barrier. No one tried to stop
her again. They called their good-byes and watched as the old couple started
their journey eastward down the mountainside.
      "The old lady really has guts, doesn't she?" someone remarked.
      Another man cupped his hands and shouted, "If you get sick, send a
      messenger back to the village."
      A third called solicitously, "Take care of yourselves!"
       When she could no longer hear their voices, Osugi turned to Uncle Gon.
"We don't have a thing to worry about," she assured him. "We're going to die
before those young people anyway."
       "You're absolutely right," he replied with conviction. Uncle Gon made his
living hunting, but in his younger days he had been a samurai involved, to hear
him tell it, in many a gory battle. Even now his skin was healthily ruddy and his
hair as black as ever. His surname was Fuchikawa; Gon stood for Gonroku, his
given name. As Matahachi's uncle, he was naturally quite concerned and upset
about the recent goings-on.
       "Granny," he said.
       "What?"
       "You had the foresight to dress for the road, but I'm just wearing my
everyday clothes. I'll have to stop somewhere for sandals and a hat."

       "There's a teahouse about halfway down this hill."
       "So there is! Yes, I remember. It's called the Mikazuki Teahouse, isn't it?
I'm sure they'll have what I need."
       By the time they reached the teahouse they were surprised to see that the
sun was beginning to set. They had thought they had more daylight hours ahead
of them, since the days were growing longer with the approach of summer—
more time to search on this, their first day in pursuit of their lost family honor.
       They had some tea and rested for a while. Then, as Osugi laid down the
money for the bill, she said, "Takano's too far to reach by nightfall. We'll have to
make do with sleeping on those smelly mats at the packhorse driver's inn in
Shingū, although not sleeping at all might be better than that."
       "We need our sleep now more than ever. Let's get going," said Gonroku,
rising to his feet and clutching the new straw hat he had just bought. "But wait
just a minute."
       "Why? "I want to fill this bamboo tube with drinking water."
       Going around behind the building, he submerged his tube in a clear
running brook till the bubbles stopped rising to the surface. Walking back toward
the road in front, he glanced through a side window into the dim interior of the
teahouse. Suddenly he came to a halt, surprised to see a figure lying on the floor,
covered with straw matting. The smell of medicine permeated the air. Gonroku
couldn't see the face, but he could discern long black hair strewn every which
way on the pillow.
      "Uncle Gon, hurry up!" Osugi cried impatiently.
      "Coming."
      "What kept you?"
      "There seems to be a sick person inside," he said, walking behind her like a
      chastened dog.
      "What's so unusual about that? You're as easy to distract as a child."
       "Sorry, sorry," he apologized hastily. He was as intimidated by Osugi as
anyone else but knew better than most how to manage her.
       They set off down the fairly steep hill leading to the Harima road. The
road, used daily by packhorses from the silver mines, was pitted with potholes.
"Don't fall down, Granny," Gon advised.
      "How dare you patronize me! I can walk on this road with my eyes closed.
      Be careful yourself, you old fool."
      Just then a voice greeted them from behind. "You two are pretty spry, aren't
      you?"

      They turned to see the owner of the teahouse on horseback.
      "Oh, yes; we just had a rest at your place, thank you. And where are you off
      to?"
      "Tatsuno."
      "At this hour?"
      "There's no doctor between here and there. Even on horseback, it'll take me
      at least till midnight."
      "Is it your wife who's sick?"
       "Oh, no." His brows knitted. "If it were my wife, or one of the children, I
wouldn't mind. But it's a lot of trouble to go to for a stranger, someone who just
stopped in to take a rest."
       "Oh," said Uncle Gon, "is it the girl in your back room? I happened to
glance in and see her."
       Osugi's brows now knitted as well.
       "Yes," the shopkeeper said. "While she was resting, she started shivering,
so I offered her the back room to lie down in. I felt I had to do something. Well,
she didn't get any better. In fact, she seems much worse. She's burning up with
fever. Looks pretty bad."
       Osugi stopped in her tracks. "Is the girl about sixteen and very slender?"
"Yes, about sixteen, I'd say. Says she comes from Miyamoto."
       Osugi, winking at Gonroku, began poking around in her obi. A look of
distress came over her face as she exclaimed, "Oh, I've left them back at the
teahouse!"
      "Left what?"
      "My prayer beads. I remember now—I put them down on a stool."
      "Oh, that's too bad," said the shopkeeper, turning his horse around. "I'll go
      back for them."
       "Oh, no! You've got to fetch the doctor. That sick girl's more important
than my beads. We'll just go back and pick them up ourselves."
       Uncle Gon was already on his way, striding rapidly back up the hill. As
soon as Osugi disposed of the solicitous teahouse owner, she hurried to catch up.
Before long they were both puffing and panting. Neither spoke.
       It had to be Otsū!
       Otsū had never really shaken off the fever she caught the night they
dragged her in out of the storm. Somehow she forgot about feeling sick during
the few hours she was with Takezō, but after he left her she'd walked only a
short way before beginning to give in to pain and fatigue. By the time she got to

the teahouse, she felt miserable.
       She did not know how long she had been lying in the back room,
deliriously begging for water time and time again. Before leaving, the
shopkeeper had looked in on her and urged her to try to stick it out. Moments
later she had forgotten he'd ever spoken to her.
       Her mouth was parched. She felt as if she had a mouthful of thorns.
"Master, water, please," she called out feebly. Hearing no reply, she raised
herself on her elbows and craned her neck toward the water basin just outside the
door. Slowly she managed to crawl to it, but as she put her hand on the bamboo
dipper at the side, she heard a rain shutter fall to the ground somewhere behind
her. The teahouse was little more than a mountain hut to begin with, and there
was nothing to prevent anyone from simply lifting out any or all of the loosely
fitted shutters.
       Osugi and Uncle Gon stumbled in through the opening.
       "I can't see a thing," complained the old woman in what she thought was a
whisper.
       "Wait a minute," Gon replied, heading toward the hearth room, where he
stirred up the embers and threw on some wood to get a bit of light.
      "She's not in here, Granny!"
      "She must be! She can't have gotten away!" Almost immediately, Osugi
      noticed that the door in the back room was ajar.
      "Look, out there!" she shouted.
       Otsū, who was standing just outside, threw the dipperful of water through
the narrow opening into the old woman's face and sped downhill like a bird in
the wind, sleeves and skirt trailing behind her.
      Osugi ran outside and spat out an imprecation.
      "Gon, Gon. Do something, do something!"
      "Did she get away?"
       "Of course she did! We certainly gave her enough warning, making all that
noise. You would have to drop the shutter!" The old woman's face contorted with
rage. "Can't you do something?"
       Uncle Gon directed his attention to the deer-like form flying in the
distance. He raised his arm and pointed. "That's her, right? Don't worry, she
doesn't have much of a head start. She's sick and anyway she only has the legs of
a girl. I'll catch up with her in no time." He tucked his chin in and broke into a
run. Osugi followed close behind.
       "Uncle Gon," she cried, "you can use your sword on her, but don't cut off

her head until after I've had a chance to give her a piece of my mind."
     Uncle Gon suddenly let out a scream of dismay and fell to his hands and
     knees.
     "What's the matter?" cried Osugi, coming up behind him.
     "Look down." Osugi did. Directly in front of them was a steep drop into a
     bamboo-covered ravine.
     "She dived into that?"
     "Yes. I don't think it's very deep, but it's too dark to tell. I'll have to go back
     to the teahouse and get a torch."
      As he knelt staring into the ravine, Osugi cried, "What are you waiting for,
you dolt?" and gave him a violent shove. There was the sound of feet trying to
gain a footing, scrambling desperately before coming to a stop at the bottom of
the ravine.
      "You old witch!" shouted Uncle Gon angrily. "Now just get on down here
yourself! See how you like it!"


       Takezō, arms folded, sat atop a large boulder and stared across the valley
at the Hinagura stockade. Under one of those roofs, he reflected, his sister was
imprisoned. But he'd sat there from dawn to dusk the previous day and all day
today, unable to devise a plan to get her out. He intended to sit until he did.
       His thinking had progressed to the point where he was confident he could
outmaneuver the fifty or a hundred soldiers guarding the stockade, but he
continued to ponder the lay of the land. He had to get not only in but out. It was
not encouraging: behind the stockade was a deep gorge, and at the front the road
into the stockade was well protected by a double gate. To make matters worse,
the two of them would be forced to flee across a flat plateau, which offered not a
single tree to hide behind; on a cloudless day such as this, a better target would
be hard to find.
       The situation thus called for a night assault, but he'd observed that the
gates were closed and locked before sunset. Any attempt to jimmy them open
would doubtless set off a cacophonous alarm of wooden clappers. There seemed
no foolproof way to approach the fortress.
       "There's no way," Takezō thought sadly. "Even if I just took a long shot,
risked my life and hers, it wouldn't work." He felt humiliated and helpless.
"How," he asked himself, "did I get to be such a coward? A week ago I wouldn't
have even thought about the chances of getting out alive."

       For another half day his arms remained folded over his breast as if locked.
He feared something he couldn't define and hesitated getting any closer to the
stockade. Time and time again he upbraided himself. "I've lost my nerve. I never
used to be this way. Maybe staring death in the face makes cowards out of
everyone."
       He shook his head. No, it wasn't that, not cowardice.
       He had simply learned his lesson, the one Takuan had taken so much
trouble to teach, and could now see things more clearly. He felt a new calm, a
sense of peace. It seemed to flow in his breast like a gentle river. Being brave
was very different from being ferocious; he saw that now. He didn't feel like an
animal, he felt like a man, a courageous man who's outgrown his adolescent
recklessness. The life that had been given to him was something to be treasured
and cherished, polished and perfected.
       He stared at the lovely clear sky, whose color alone seemed a miracle.
Still, he could not leave his sister stranded, even if it meant violating, one last
time, the precious self-knowledge he'd so recently and painfully acquired.
       A plan began to take shape. "After nightfall, I'll cross the valley and climb
the cliff on the other side. The natural barrier may be a blessing in disguise;
there's no gate at the back, and it doesn't seem heavily guarded."
       He had hardly arrived at this decision when an arrow whizzed toward him
and thudded into the ground inches from his toes. Across the valley, he saw a
crowd of people milling about just inside the stockade. Obviously they'd spotted
him. Almost immediately they dispersed. He surmised it had been a test shot, to
see how he'd react, and deliberately remained motionless upon his perch.
       Before long, the light of the evening sun began to fade behind the peaks of
the western mountains. Just before darkness dropped, he arose and picked up a
rock. He had spotted his dinner flying in the air over his head. He downed the
bird on the first try, tore it apart and sank his teeth into the warm flesh.
       While he ate, twenty-odd soldiers moved noisily into position and
surrounded him. Once in place, they let out a battle cry, one man shouting, "It's
Takezō! Takezō from Miyamoto!"
       "He's dangerous! Don't underestimate him!" someone else warned.
       Looking up from his feast of raw fowl, Takezō trained a murderous eye on
his would-be captors. It was the same look animals flash when disturbed in the
midst of a meal.
       "Y-a-a-h-h!" he yelled, seizing a huge rock and hurling it at the perimeter
of this human wall. The rock turned red with blood, and in no time he was over

it and away, running straight toward the stockade gate.
      The men were agape.
      "What's he doing?"
      "Where's the fool going?"
      "He's out of his mind!"
       He flew like a crazed dragonfly, with the war-whooping soldiers in full
chase. By the time they reached the outer gate, however, he'd already leapt over
it. But now he was between the gates, in what was in fact a cage. Takezō's eyes
took in none of this. He could see neither the pursuing soldiers nor the fence, nor
the guards inside the second gate. He wasn't even conscious of knocking out,
with a single blow, the sentinel who tried to jump him. With almost superhuman
strength, he wrenched at a post of the inner gate, shaking it furiously till he was
able to pull it out of the ground. Then he turned on his pursuers. He didn't know
their number; all he knew was that something big and black was attacking him.
Taking aim as best he could, he struck at the amorphous mass with the gatepost.
A good number of lances and swords broke, flew into the air and fell useless to
the ground.
       "Ogin!" cried Takezō, running toward the rear of the stockade. "Ogin, it's
me—Takezō!"
       He glared at the buildings with fiery eyes, calling out repeatedly to his
sister. "Has it all been a trick?" he wondered in panic. One by one he began
battering down doors with the gatepost. The guards' chickens, squawking for
dear life, flew in every direction.
      "Ogin!"
      When he failed to locate her, his hoarse cries became nearly unintelligible.
      In the shadows of one of the small, dirty cells he saw a man trying to sneak
      away.
       "Halt!" he shouted, throwing the bloodstained gatepost at the weasel-like
creature's feet. When Takezō leaped at him, he began to cry shamelessly. Takezō
slapped him sharply on the cheek. "Where's my sister?" he roared. "What have
they done to her? Tell me where she is or I'll beat you to death!"
      "She . . . she's not here. Day before yesterday they took her away. Orders
      from the castle."
      "Where, you stupid bastard, where?"
      "Himeji."
      "Himeji?"
      "Y-y-yes."

     "If you're lying, I'll . . ." Takezō grabbed the sniveling mass by its hair. "It's
     true—true. I swear!"
     "It better be, or I'll come back just for you!"
      The soldiers were closing in again, and Takezō lifted the man and hurled
him at them. Then he disappeared into the shadows of the dingy cells. Half a
dozen arrows flew by him, one sticking like a giant sewing needle in the skirt of
his kimono. Takezō bit his thumbnail and watched the arrows speed by, then
suddenly dashed for the fence and was over it in a flash.
      Behind him there was a loud explosion. The echo of the gunshot roared
across the valley.
      Takezō sped down the gorge, and as he ran, fragments of Takuan's
teachings were racing through his head: "Learn to fear that which is fearsome. . .
. Brute strength is child's play, the mindless strength of beasts. . . . Have the
strength of the true warrior . . . real courage. . . . Life is precious."
