The Little Bell


       Takezō lay among the corpses. There were thousands of them.
"The whole world's gone crazy," he thought dimly. "A man might as well be a
dead leaf, floating in the autumn breeze."
       He himself looked like one of the lifeless bodies surrounding him. He tried
to raise his head, but could only lift it a few inches from the ground. He couldn't
remember ever feeling so weak. "How long have I been here?" he wondered.
       Flies came buzzing around his head. He wanted to brush them away, but
couldn't even muster the energy to raise his arm. It was stiff, almost brittle, like
the rest of his body. "I must've been out for quite a while," he thought, wiggling
one finger at a time. Little did he know he was wounded, with two bullets lodged
firmly in his thigh.
       Low, dark clouds shifted ominously across the sky. The night before,
sometime between midnight and dawn, a blinding rain had drenched the plain of
Sekigahara. It was now past noon on the fifteenth of the ninth month of 1600.
Though the typhoon had passed, now and then fresh torrents of rain would fall
on the corpses and onto Takezō's upturned face. Each time it came, he'd open
and close his mouth like a fish, trying to drink in the droplets. "It's like the water
they wipe a dying man's lips with," he reflected, savoring each bit of moisture.
His head was numb, his thoughts the fleeting shadows of delirium.
       His side had lost. He knew that much. Kobayakawa Hideaki, supposedly
an ally, had been secretly in league with the Eastern Army, and when he turned
on Ishida Mitsunari's troops at twilight, the tide of battle turned too. He then
attacked the armies of other commanders—Ukita, Shimazu and Konishi—and
the collapse of the Western Army was complete. In only half a day's fighting, the
question of who would henceforth rule the country was settled. It was Tokugawa
Ieyasu, the powerful Edo daimyō.
       Images of his sister and the old villagers floated before his eyes. "I'm
dying," he thought without a tinge of sadness. "Is this what it's really like?" He
felt drawn to the peace of death, like a child mesmerized by a flame. Suddenly
one of the nearby corpses raised its head. "Takezō."
       The images of his mind ceased. As if awakened from the dead, he turned
his head toward the sound. The voice, he was sure, was that of his best friend.

With all his strength he raised himself slightly, squeezing out a whisper barely
audible above the pelting rain. "Matahachi, is that you?" Then he collapsed, lay
still and listened.
        "Takezō! Are you really alive?"
        "Yes, alive!" he shouted in a sudden outburst of bravado. "And you? You'd
better not die either. Don't you dare!" His eyes were wide open now, and a smile
played faintly about his lips.
        "Not me! No, sir." Gasping for breath, crawling on his elbows and
dragging his legs stiffly behind him, Matahachi inched his way toward his
friend. He made a grab for Takezō's hand but only caught his small finger with
his own. As childhood friends they'd often sealed promises with this gesture. He
came closer and gripped the whole hand.
       "I can't believe you're all right too! We must be the only survivors."
       "Don't speak too soon. I haven't tried to get up yet."
       "I'll help you. Let's get out of here!"
       Suddenly Takezō pulled Matahachi to the ground and growled, "Play dead!
       More trouble coming!"
        The ground began to rumble like a caldron. Peeking through their arms,
they watched the approaching whirlwind close in on them. Then they were
nearer, lines of jet-black horsemen hurtling directly toward them.
        "The bastards! They're back!" exclaimed Matahachi, raising his knee as if
preparing for a sprint. Takezō seized his ankle, nearly breaking it, and yanked
him to the ground.
In a moment the horses were flying past them—hundreds of muddy lethal
hooves galloping in formation, riding roughshod over the fallen samurai. Battle
cries on their lips, their armor and weapons clinking and clanking, the riders
came on and on.
        Matahachi lay on his stomach, eyes closed, hoping against hope they
would not be trampled, but Takezō stared unblinkingly upward. The horses
passed so close they could smell their sweat. Then it was over. Miraculously
they were uninjured and undetected, and for several minutes both remained
silent in disbelief.
        "Saved again!" exclaimed Takezō, reaching his hand out to Matahachi.
Still hugging the ground, Matahachi slowly turned his head to show a broad,
slightly trembling grin. "Somebody's on our side, that's for sure," he said huskily.
        The two friends helped each other, with great difficulty, to their feet.
Slowly they made their way across the battlefield to the safety of the wooded

hills, hobbling along with arms around each other's shoulders. There they
collapsed but after a rest began foraging for food. For two days they subsisted on
wild chestnuts and edible leaves in the sodden hollows of Mount Ibuki. This kept
them from starving, but Takezō's stomach ached and Matahachi's bowels
tormented him. No food could fill him, no drink quench his thirst, but even he
felt his strength returning bit by bit.
       The storm on the fifteenth marked the end of the fall typhoons. Now, only
two nights later, a cold white moon glared grimly down from a cloudless sky.
       They both knew how dangerous it was to be on the road in the glaring
moonlight, their shadows looming like silhouette targets in clear view of any
patrols searching for stragglers. The decision to risk it had been Takezō's. With
Matahachi in such misery, saying he'd rather be captured than continue trying to
walk, there really didn't seem to be much choice. They had to move on, but it
was also clear that they had to find a place to lie low and rest. They made their
way slowly in what they thought was the direction of the small town of Tarui.
       "Can you make it?" Takezō asked repeatedly. He held his friend's arm
around his own shoulder to help him along. "Are you all right?" It was the
labored breathing that worried him. "You want to rest?"
       "I'm all right." Matahachi tried to sound brave, but his face was paler than
the moon above them. Even with his lance for a walking stick, he could barely
put one foot in front of the other.
       He'd been apologizing abjectly over and over. "I'm sorry, Takezō. I know
it's me who's slowing us down. I'm really sorry."
       The first few times Takezō had simply brushed this off with "Forget it."
Eventually, when they stopped to rest, he turned to his friend and burst out,
"Look, I'm the one who should be apologizing. I'm the one who got you into this
in the first place, remember? Remember how I told you my plan, how I was
finally going to do something that would really have impressed my father? I've
never been able to stand the fact that to his dying day he was sure I'd never
amount to anything. I was going to show him! Ha!"
       Takezō's father, Munisai, had once served under Lord Shimmen of Iga. As
soon as Takezō heard that Ishida Mitsunari was raising an army, he was
convinced that the chance of a lifetime had finally arrived. His father had been a
samurai. Wasn't it only natural that he would be made one too? He ached to enter
the fray, to prove his mettle, to have word spread like wildfire through the
village that he had decapitated an enemy general. He had wanted desperately to
prove he was somebody to be reckoned with, to be respected—not just the

village troublemaker.
       Takezō reminded Matahachi of all this, and Matahachi nodded. "I know. I
know. But I felt the same way. It wasn't just you."
       Takezō went on: "I wanted you to come with me because we've always
done everything together. But didn't your mother carry on something awful!
Yelling and telling everybody I was crazy and no good! And your fiancée Otsū,
and my sister and everybody else crying and saying village boys should stay in
the village. Oh, maybe they had their reasons. We are both only sons, and if we
get ourselves killed there's no one else to carry on the family names. But who
cares? Is that any way to live?"
       They had slipped out of the village unnoticed and were convinced that no
further barrier lay between themselves and the honors of battle. When they
reached the Shimmen encampment, however, they came face to face with the
realities of war. They were told straightaway they would not be made samurai,
not overnight nor even in a few weeks, no matter who their fathers had been. To
Ishida and the other generals, Takezō and Matahachi were a pair of country
bumpkins, little more than children who happened to have got their hands on a
couple of lances. The best they could wangle was to be allowed to stay on as
common foot soldiers. Their responsibilities, if they could be called that,
consisted of carrying weapons, rice kettles and other utensils, cutting grass,
working on the road gangs and occasionally going out as scouts.
       "Samurai, ha!" said Takezō. "What a joke. General's head! I didn't even get
near an enemy samurai, let alone a general. Well, at least it's all over. Now what
are we going to do? I can't leave you here all alone. If I did, I could never face
your mother or Otsū again."
       "Takezō, I don't blame you for the mess we're in. It wasn't your fault we
lost. If anybody's to blame, it's that two-faced Kobayakawa. I'd really like to get
my hands on him. I'd kill the son of a bitch!"
       A couple of hours later they were standing on the edge of a small plain,
gazing out over a sea of reed like miscanthus, battered and broken by the storm.
No houses. No lights.
       There were lots of corpses here too, lying just as they had fallen. The head
of one rested in some tall grass. Another was on its back in a small stream. Still
another was entangled grotesquely with a dead horse. The rain had washed the
blood away, and in the moonlight the dead flesh looked like fish scales. All
around them was the lonely autumn litany of bellrings and crickets.
      A stream of tears cleared a white path down Matahachi's grimy face. He

      heaved the sigh of a very sick man.
      "Takezō, if I die, will you take care of Otsū?"
      "What are you talking about?"
      "I feel like I'm dying."
       Takezō snapped, "Well, if that's the way you feel, you probably will." He
was exasperated, wishing his friend were stronger, so he could lean on him once
in a while, not physically, but for encouragement. "Come on, Matahachi! Don't
be such a crybaby."
       "My mother has people to look after her, but Otsū's all alone in the world.
Always has been. I feel so sorry for her, Takezō. Promise you'll take care of her
if I'm not around."
       "Get hold of yourself! People don't die from diarrhea. Sooner or later we're
going to find a house, and when we do I'll put you to bed and get some medicine
for you. Now stop all this blubbering about dying!"
       A little farther on, they came to a place where the piles of lifeless bodies
made it look as if a whole division had been wiped out. By this time they were
callous to the sight of gore. Their glazed eyes took in the scene with cold
indifference and they stopped to rest again.
       While they were catching their breath, they heard something move among
the corpses. Both of them shrank back in fright, instinctively crouching down 6
with their eyes peeled and senses alerted.
       The figure made a quick darting movement, like that of a surprised rabbit.
As their eyes focused, they saw that whoever it was was squatting close to the
ground. Thinking at first it was a stray samurai, they braced themselves for a
dangerous encounter, but to their amazement the fierce warrior turned out to be a
young girl. She seemed to be about thirteen or fourteen and wore a kimono with
rounded sleeves. The narrow obi around her waist, though patched in places, was
of gold brocade; there among the corpses she presented a bizarre sight indeed.
She looked over and stared at them suspiciously with shrewd catlike eyes.
       Takezō and Matahachi were both wondering the same thing: what on earth
could bring a young girl to a ghost-ridden, corpse-strewn field in the dead of
night?
      For a time they both simply stared back at her. Then Takezō said, "Who are
      you?"
      She blinked a couple of times, got to her feet and sped away.
      "Stop!" shouted Takezō. "I just want to ask you a question. Don't go!"
      But gone she was, like a flash of lightning in the night. The sound of a

      small bell receded eerily into the darkness.
      "Could it have been a ghost?" Takezō mused aloud as he stared vacantly
      into the thin mist.
       Matahachi shivered and forced a laugh. "If there were any ghosts around
here, I think they'd be those of soldiers, don't you?"
       "I wish I hadn't scared her away," said Takezō. "There's got to be a village
around here somewhere. She could've given us directions."
       They went on and climbed the nearer of the two hills ahead of them. In the
hollow on the other side was the marsh that stretched south from Mount Fuwa.
And a light, only half a mile away.
       When they approached the farmhouse, they got the impression that it
wasn't of the run-of-the-mill variety. For one thing, it was surrounded by a thick
dirt wall. For another, its gate verged on being grandiose. Or at least the remains
of the gate, for it was old and badly in need of repair.
       Takezō went up to the door and rapped lightly. "Is anybody home?"
       Getting no answer, he tried again. "Sorry to bother you at this hour, but my
friend here is sick. We don't want to cause any trouble—he just needs some rest."
       They heard whispering inside and, presently, the sound of someone
coming to the door.
       "You're stragglers from Sekigahara, aren't you?" The voice belonged to a
young girl.
       "That's right," said Takezō. "We were under Lord Shimmen of Iga." "Go
away! If you're found around here, we'll be in trouble."
       "Look, we've very sorry to bother you like this, but we've been walking a
long time. My friend needs some rest, that's all, and—"
       "Please go away!"
       "All right, if you really want us to, but couldn't you give my friend some
medicine? His stomach's in such bad shape it's hard for us to keep moving."
"Well, I don't know. ..."
       After a moment or two, they heard footsteps and a little tinkling sound
receding into the house, growing fainter and fainter.
       Just then they noticed the face. It was in a side window, a woman's face,
and it had been watching them all along.
       "Akemi," she called out, "let them in. They're foot soldiers. The Tokugawa
patrols aren't going to be wasting time on them. They're nobodies."
       Akemi opened the door, and the woman, who introduced herself as Okō,
came and listened to Takezō's story.

        It was agreed that they could have the woodshed to sleep in. To quiet his
bowels, Matahachi was given magnolia charcoal powder and thin rice gruel with
scallions in it. Over the next few days, he slept almost without interruption,
while Takezō, sitting vigil by his side, used cheap spirits to treat the bullet
wounds in his thigh.
        One evening about a week later, Takezō and Matahachi sat chatting. "They
must have a trade of some kind," Takezō remarked.
        "I couldn't care less what they do. I'm just glad they took us in."
        But Takezō's curiosity was aroused. "The mother's not so old," he went on.
        "It's strange, the two of them living alone here in the mountains." "Umm.
Don't you think the girl looks a little like Otsū?"
        "There is something about her that puts me in mind of Otsū, but I don't
think they really look alike. They're both nice-looking, that's about it. What do
you suppose she was doing the first time we saw her, creeping around all those
corpses in the middle of the night? It didn't seem to bother her at all. Ha! I can
still see it. Her face was as calm and serene as those dolls they make in Kyoto.
What a picture!"
       Matahachi motioned for him to be quiet.
       "Shh! I hear her bell."
       Akemi's light knock on the door sounded like the tapping of a woodpecker.
       "Matahachi, Takezō," she called softly.
       "Yes?"
       "It's me."
       Takezō got up and undid the lock. She came in carrying a tray of medicine
       and food and asked them how they were.
       "Much better, thanks to you and your mother."
       "Mother said that even if you feel better, you shouldn't talk too loud or go
       outside."
       Takezō spoke for the two of them. "We're really sorry to put you to so much
       trouble."
        "Oh, that's okay, you just have to be careful. Ishida Mitsunari and some of
the other generals haven't been caught yet. They're keeping a close watch on this
area and the roads are crawling with Tokugawa troops."
        "They are?"
        "So even though you're only foot soldiers, Mother said that if we're caught
hiding you, we'll be arrested."
"We won't make a sound," Takezō promised. "I'll even cover Matahachi's face

with a rag if he snores too loudly."
      Akemi smiled, turned to go and said, "Good night. I'll see you in the
      morning."
      "Wait!" said Matahachi. "Why don't you hang around and talk awhile?" "I
      can't."
      "Why not?"
      "Mother'd be angry."
      "Why worry about her? How old are you?"
      "Sixteen."
      "Small for your age, aren't you?"
      "Thanks for telling me."
      "Where's your father?"
      "I don't have one anymore."
      "Sorry. Then how do you live?"
      "We make moxa."
      "That medicine you burn on your skin to get rid of pain?"
        "Yes, the moxa from hereabouts is famous. In spring we cut mugwort on
Mount Ibuki. In summer we dry it and in fall and winter make it into moxa. We
sell it in Tarui. People come from all over just to buy it."
      "I guess you don't need a man around to do that."
      "Well, if that's all you wanted to know, I'd better be going."
      "Hold on, just another second," said Takezō. "I have one more question."
      "Well?"
        "The other night, the night we came here, we saw a girl out on the
battlefield and she looked just like you. That was you, wasn't it?"
      Akemi turned quickly and opened the door.
      "What were you doing out there?"
      She slammed the door behind her, and as she ran to the house the little bell
      rang out in a strange, erratic rhythm.
