The Flower Festival


       In the seventeenth century, the Mimasaka highroad was something of a
major thoroughfare. It led up from Tatsuno in Harima Province, winding through
a terrain proverbially described as "one mountain after another." Like the stakes
marking the Mimasaka-Harima boundary, it followed a seemingly endless series
of ridges. Travelers emerging from Nakayama Pass looked down into the valley
of the Aida River, where, often to their surprise, they saw a sizable village.
       Actually, Miyamoto was more a scattering of hamlets than a real village.
One cluster of houses lay along the riverbanks, another huddled farther up in the
hills, and a third sat amid level fields that were stony and hence hard to plow. All
in all, the number of houses was substantial for a rural settlement of the time.
       Until about a year before, Lord Shimmen of Iga had maintained a castle
not a mile up the river—a small castle as castles go, but one that nonetheless
attracted a steady stream of artisans and tradespeople. Farther to the north were
the Shikozaka silver mines, which were now past their prime but had once lured
miners from far and wide.
       Travelers going from Tottori to Himeji, or from Tajima through the
mountains to Bizen, naturally used the highroad. Just as naturally, they stopped
over in Miyamoto. It had the exotic air of a village often visited by the natives of
several provinces and boasted of not only an inn, but a clothing store as well. It
also harbored a bevy of women of the night, who, throats powdered white as was
the fashion, hovered before their business establishments like white bats under
the eaves. This was the town Takezō and Matahachi had left to go to war.
       Looking down on the rooftops of Miyamoto, Otsū sat and daydreamed.
She was a wisp of a girl, with fair complexion and shining black hair. Fine of
bone, fragile of limb, she had an ascetic, almost ethereal air. Unlike the robust
and ruddy farm girls working in the rice paddies below, Otsū's movements were
delicate. She walked gracefully, with her long neck stretched and head held high.
Now, perched on the edge of Shippōji temple porch, she was as poised as a
porcelain statuette.
       A foundling raised in this mountain temple, she had acquired a lovely
aloofness rarely found in a girl of sixteen. Her isolation from other girls her age
and from the workaday world had given her eyes a contemplative, serious cast

which tended to put off men used to frivolous females. Matahachi, her betrothed,
was just a year older, and since he'd left Miyamoto with Takezō the previous
summer, she'd heard nothing. Even into the first and second months of the new
year, she'd yearned for word of him, but now the fourth month was at hand. She
no longer dared hope.
       Lazily her gaze drifted up to the clouds, and a thought slowly emerged.
"Soon it will have been a whole year."
       "Takezō's sister hasn't heard from him either. I'd be a fool to think either of
them is still alive." Now and then she'd say this to someone, longing, almost
pleading with her voice and eyes, for the other person to contradict her, to tell
her not to give up. But no one heeded her sighs. To the down-to-earth villagers,
who had already gotten used to the Tokugawa troops occupying the modest
Shimmen castle, there was no reason in the world to assume they'd survived. Not
a single member of Lord Shimmen's family had come back from Sekigahara, but
that was only natural. They were samurai; they had lost. They wouldn't want to
show their faces among people who knew them. But common foot soldiers?
Wasn't it all right for them to come home? Wouldn't they have done so long ago
if they had survived?
       "Why," wondered Otsū, as she had wondered countless times before, "why
do men run off to war?" She had come to enjoy in a melancholy way sitting
alone on the temple porch and pondering this imponderable. Lost in wistful
reverie, she could have lingered there for hours. Suddenly a male voice calling
"Otsū!" invaded her island of peace.
       Looking up, Otsū saw a youngish man coming toward her from the well.
He was clad in only a loincloth, which barely served its purpose, and his
weathered skin glowed like the dull gold of an old Buddhist statue. It was the
Zen monk who, three or four years before, had wandered in from Tajima
Province. He'd been staying at the temple ever since.
       "At last it's spring," he was saying to himself with satisfaction. "Spring—a
blessing, but a mixed one. As soon as it gets a little warm, those insidious lice
overrun the country. They're trying to take it over, just like Fujiwara no
Michinaga, that wily rascal of a regent." After a pause, he went on with his
monologue.
       "I've just washed my clothes, but where on earth am I going to dry this
tattered old robe? I can't hang it on the plum tree. It'd be a sacrilege, an insult to
nature to cover those flowers. Here I am, a man of taste, and I can't find a place
to hang this robe! Otsū! Lend me a drying pole."

       Blushing at the sight of the scantily clad monk, she cried, "Takuan! You
can't just walk around half naked till your clothes dry!"
       "Then I'll go to sleep. How's that?"
       "Oh, you're impossible!"
       Raising one arm skyward and pointing the other toward the ground, he
assumed the pose of the tiny Buddha statues that worshipers anointed once a
year with special tea.
       "Actually, I should have just waited till tomorrow. Since it's the eighth, the
Buddha's birthday, I could have just stood like this and let the people bow to me.
When they ladled the sweet tea over me, I could've shocked everyone by licking
my lips." Looking pious, he intoned the first words of the Buddha: "In heaven
above and earth below, only I am holy."
      Otsū burst out laughing at his irreverent display. "You do look just like him,
      you know!"
      "Of course I do. I am the living incarnation of Prince Siddhartha."
      "Then stand perfectly still. Don't move! I'll go and get some tea to pour over
      you."
       At this point, a bee began a full-scale assault on the monk's head and his
reincarnation pose instantly gave way to a flailing of arms. The bee, noticing a
gap in his loosely hung loincloth, darted in, and Otsū doubled up with laughter.
Since the arrival of Takuan Sōhō, which was the name he was given on
becoming a priest, even the reticent Otsū went few days without being amused
by something he'd do or say.
       Suddenly, however, she stopped laughing. "I can't waste any more time
like this. I have important things to do!"
       As she was slipping her small white feet into her sandals, the monk asked
innocently, "What things?"
       "What things? Have you forgotten too? Your little pantomime just
reminded me. I'm supposed to get everything ready for tomorrow. The old priest
asked me to pick flowers so we can decorate the flower temple. Then I have to
set everything up for the anointing ceremony. And tonight I've got to make the
sweet tea."
      "Where are you going flower-picking?"
      "Down by the river, in the lower part of the field."
      "I'll come with you."
      "Without any clothes on?"
       "You'll never be able to cut enough flowers by yourself. You need help.

Besides, man is born unclothed. Nakedness is his natural state."
       "That may be, but I don't find it natural. Really, I'd rather go alone."
       Hoping to elude him, Otsū hurried around to the rear of the temple. She
strapped a basket on her back, picked up a sickle and slipped out the side gate,
but only moments later turned to see him close behind her. Takuan was now
swathed in a large wrapping cloth, the kind people used to carry their bedding.
      "Is this more to your liking?" he called with a grin.
      "Of course not. You look ridiculous. People will think you're crazy!"
      "Why?"
      "Never mind. Just don't walk next to me!"
      "You never seemed to mind walking beside a man before."
       "Takuan, you're perfectly horrible!" She ran off ahead, with him following
in strides that would have befitted the Buddha descending from the Himalayas.
His wrapping cloth flapped wildly in the breeze.
       "Don't be angry, Otsū! You know I'm teasing. Besides, your boyfriends
won't like you if you pout too much."
       Eight or nine hundred yards down from the temple, spring flowers were
blooming profusely along both banks of the Aida River. Otsū put her basket
down and, amid a sea of fluttering butterflies, began swinging her sickle in wide
circles, cutting the flowers off near their roots.
       After a while, Takuan grew reflective. "How peaceful it is here," he
sighed, sounding both religious and childlike. "Why, when we could live out our
lives in a flower-filled paradise, do we all prefer to weep, suffer and get lost in a
maelstrom of passion and fury, torturing ourselves in the flames of hell? I hope
that you, at least, won't have to go through all that."
       Otsū, rhythmically filling her basket with yellow rape blossoms, spring
chrysanthemums, daisies, poppies and violets, replied, "Takuan, instead of
preaching a sermon, you'd better watch out for the bees."
       He nodded his head, sighing in despair. "I'm not talking about bees, Otsū. I
simply want to pass on to you the Buddha's teaching on the fate of women."
"This woman's fate is none of your business!"
       "Oh, but you're wrong! It's my duty as a priest to pry into people's lives. I
       agree it's a meddlesome trade, but it's no more useless than the business of
a merchant, clothier, carpenter or samurai. It exists because it is needed." Otsū
softened. "I suppose you're right."
       "It does happen, of course, that the priesthood has been on bad terms with
womankind for some three thousand years. You see, Buddhism teaches that

women are evil. Fiends. Messengers of hell. I've spent years immersed in the
scriptures, so it's no accident that you and I fight all the time."
      "And why, according to your scriptures, are women evil?"
      "Because they deceive men."
      "Don't men deceive women too?"
      "Yes, but . . . the Buddha himself was a man."
      "Are you saying that if he'd been a woman, things would be the other way
      around?"
      "Of course not! How could a demon ever become a Buddha!"
      "Takuan, that doesn't make any sense."
      "If religious teachings were just common sense, we wouldn't need prophets
      to pass them on to us."
       "There you go again, twisting everything to your own advantage!" "A
typical female comment. Why attack me personally?"
       She stopped swinging her sickle again, a world-weary look on her face.
"Takuan, let's stop it. I'm not in the mood for this today."
       "Silence, woman!"
       "You're the one who's been doing all the talking."
       Takuan closed his eyes as if to summon patience. "Let me try to explain.
When the Buddha was young, he sat under the bo tree, where she-demons
tempted him night and day. Naturally, he didn't form a high opinion of women.
But even so, being all-merciful, he took some female disciples in his old age."
       "Because he'd grown wise or senile?"
       "Don't be blasphemous!" he warned sharply. "And don't forget the
Bodhisattva Nagarjuna, who hated—I mean feared—women as much as the
Buddha did. Even he went so far as to praise four female types: obedient sisters,
loving companions, good mothers and submissive maidservants. He extolled
their virtues again and again, and advised men to take such women as wives."
       "Obedient sisters, loving companions, good mothers and submissive
maidservants . . . I see you have it all worked out to men's advantage."
       "Well, that's natural enough, isn't it? In ancient India, men were honored
more and women less than in Japan. Anyway, I'd like you to hear the advice
Nagarjuna gave women."
      "What advice?"
      "He said, 'Woman, marry thyself not to a man—"'
      "That's ridiculous!"
      "Let me finish. He said, 'Woman, marry thyself to the truth."'

      Otsū looked at him blankly.
       "Don't you see?" he said, with a wave of his arm. "'Marry thyself to the
truth' means that you shouldn't become infatuated with a mere mortal but should
seek the eternal."
       "But, Takuan," Otsū asked impatiently, "what is 'the truth'?"
       Takuan let both arms fall to his sides and looked at the ground. "Come to
think of it," he said thoughtfully, "I'm not really sure myself."
       Otsū burst out laughing, but Takuan ignored her. "There is something I
know for certain. Applied to your life, wedding honesty means that you shouldn't
think of going off to the city and giving birth to weak, namby-pamby children.
You should stay in the country, where you belong, and raise a fine, healthy brood
instead."
       Otsū raised her sickle impatiently. "Takuan," she snapped, exasperated,
"did you come out here to help me pick flowers or not?"
      "Of course I did. That's why I'm here."
      "In that case, stop preaching and grab this sickle."
      "All right; if you don't really want my spiritual guidance, I won't impose it
      on you," he said, pretending hurt.
       "While you're busy at work, I'll run over to Ogin's house and see if she's
finished the obi I'm supposed to wear tomorrow."
       "Ogin? Takezō's sister? I've met her, haven't I? Didn't she come with you
once to the temple?" He dropped the sickle. "I'll come with you."
      "In that outfit?"
      He pretended not to hear. "She'll probably offer us some tea. I'm dying of
      thirst."
      Totally spent from arguing with the monk, Otsū gave a weak nod and
      together they set out along the riverbank.
       Ogin was a woman of twenty-five, no longer considered in the bloom of
youth but by no means bad-looking. Although suitors tended to be put off by her
brother's reputation, she suffered no lack of proposals. Her poise and good
breeding were immediately evident to everyone. She'd turned down all offers
thus far simply on the grounds that she wanted to look after her younger brother
a bit longer.
       The house she lived in had been built by their father, Munisai, when he
was in charge of military training for the Shimmen clan. As a reward for his
excellent service, he'd been honored with the privilege of taking the Shimmen
name. Overlooking the river, the house was surrounded by a high dirt wall set on

a stone foundation and was much too large for the needs of an ordinary country
samurai. Although once imposing, it had become run down. Wild irises were
sprouting from the roof, and the wall of the dōjō where Munisai once taught
martial arts was completely plastered with white swallow droppings.
       Munisai had fallen from favor, lost his status, and died a poor man, not an
uncommon occurrence in an age of turmoil. Soon after his death, his servants
had left, but since they were all natives of Miyamoto, many still cropped in.
When they did, they would leave fresh vegetables, clean the unused rooms, fill
the water jars, sweep the path, and in countless other ways help keep the old
house going. They would also have a pleasant chat with Munisai's daughter.
       When Ogin, who was sewing in an inner room, heard the back door open,
she naturally assumed it was one of these former servants. Lost in her work, she
gave a jump when Otsū greeted her.
       "Oh," she said. "It's you. You gave me a fright. I'm just finishing your obi
now. You need it for the ceremony tomorrow, don't you?"
       "Yes, I do. Ogin, I want to thank you for going to so much trouble. I
should have sewn it myself, but there was so much to do at the temple, I never
would have had time."
       "I'm glad to be of help. I have more time on my hands than is good for me.
If I'm not busy, I start to brood."
       Otsū, raising her head, caught sight of the household altar. On it, in a small
dish, was a flickering candle. By its dim light, she saw two dark inscriptions,
carefully brush-painted. They were pasted on boards, an offering of water and
flowers before them:


      The Departed Spirit of Shimmen Takezō, Aged 17.
      The Departed Spirit of Hon'iden Matahachi, Same Age.


       "Ogin," Otsū said with alarm. "Have you gotten word they were killed?"
"Well, no . . . But what else can we think? I've accepted it. I'm sure they met
their deaths at Sekigahara."
       Otsū shook her head violently. "Don't say that! It'll bring bad luck! They
aren't dead, they aren't! I know they'll show up one of these days."
      Ogin looked at her sewing. "Do you dream about Matahachi?" she asked
      softly.

      "Yes, all the time. Why?"
      "That proves he's dead. I dream of nothing but my brother."
       "Ogin, don't say that!" Rushing over to the altar, Otsū tore the inscriptions
from their boards. "I'm getting rid of these things. They'll just invite the worst."
       Tears streamed down her face as she blew out the candle. Not satisfied
with that, she seized the flowers and the water bowl and rushed through the next
room to the veranda, where she flung the flowers as far as she could and poured
the water out over the edge. It landed right on the head of Takuan, who was
squatting on the ground below.
       "Aaii! That's cold!" he yelped, jumping up, frantically trying to dry his
head with an end of the wrapping cloth. "What're you doing? I came here for a
cup of tea, not a bath!"
       Otsū laughed until fresh tears, tears of mirth, came. "I'm sorry, Takuan. I
really am. I didn't see you."
       By way of apology, she brought him the tea he'd been waiting for. When
she went back inside, Ogin, who was staring fixedly toward the veranda, asked,
"Who is that?"
       "The itinerant monk who's staying at the temple. You know, the dirty one.
You met him one day, with me, remember? He was lying in the sun on his
stomach with his head in his hands, staring at the ground. When we asked him
what he was doing, he said his lice were having a wrestling match. He said he'd
trained them to entertain him."
      "Oh, him!"
      "Yes, him. His name's Takuan Sōhō."
      "Kind of strange."
      "That's putting it mildly."
      "What's that thing he's wearing? It doesn't look like a priest's robe." "It isn't.
      It's a wrapping cloth."
      "A wrapping cloth? He is eccentric. How old is he?"
       "He says he's thirty-one, but sometimes I feel like his older sister, he's so
silly. One of the priests told me that despite his appearance, he's an excellent
monk."
       "I suppose that's possible. You can't always judge people by their looks.
Where's he from?"
       "He was born in Tajima Province and started training for the priesthood
when he was ten. Then he entered a temple of the Rinzai Zen sect about four
years later. After he left, he became a follower of a scholar-priest from the

Daitokuji and traveled with him to Kyoto and Nara. Later on he studied under
Gudō of the Myōshinji, Laō of Sennan and a whole string of other famous holy
men. He's spent an awful lot of time studying!"
      "Maybe that's why there's something different about him."
      Otsū continued her story. "He was made a resident priest at the Nansōji
and was appointed abbot of the Daitokuji by imperial edict. I've never learned
why from anyone, and he never talks about his past, but for some reason he ran
away after only three days."
      Ogin shook her head.
      Otsū went on. "They say famous generals like Hosokawa and noblemen
like Karasumaru have tried again and again to persuade him to settle down. They
even offered to build him a temple and donate money for its upkeep, but he's just
not interested. He says he prefers to wander about the countryside like a beggar,
with only his lice for friends, I think he's probably a little crazy."
     "Maybe from his viewpoint we're the ones who are strange."
     "That's exactly what he says!"
     "How long will he stay here?"
     "There's no way of knowing. He has a habit of showing up one day and
     disappearing the next."
     Standing up near the veranda, Takuan called, "I can hear everything you're
     saying!"
     "Well, it's not as though we're saying anything bad," Otsū replied
     cheerfully.
     "I don't care if you do, if you find it amusing, but you could at least give me
     some sweet cakes to go with my tea."
     "That's what I mean," said Otsū. "He's like this all the time."
      "What do you mean, I'm 'like this'?" Takuan had a gleam in his eye. "What
about you? You sit there looking as though you wouldn't hurt a fly, acting much
more cruel and heartless than I ever would."
      "Oh, really? And how am I being cruel and heartless?"
      "By leaving me out here helpless, with nothing but tea, while you sit
around moaning about your lost lover—that's how!"


      The bells were ringing at the Daishōji and the Shippōji. They had started in
a measured beat just after dawn and still rang forth now and then long past noon.
In the morning a constant procession flowed to the temples: girls in red obis,

wives of tradesmen wearing more subdued tones, and here and there an old
woman in a dark kimono leading her grandchildren by the hand. At the Shippōji,
the small main hall was crowded with worshipers, but the young men among
them seemed more interested in stealing a glimpse of Otsū than in taking part in
the religious ceremony.
       "She's here, all right," whispered one.
       "Prettier than ever," added another.
       Inside the hall stood a miniature temple. Its roof was thatched with lime
leaves and its columns were entwined with wild flowers. Inside this "flower
temple," as it was called, stood a two-foot-high black statue of the Buddha,
pointing one hand to heaven and the other to earth. The image was placed in a
shallow clay basin, and the worshipers, as they passed, poured sweet tea over its
head with a bamboo ladle. Takuan stood by with an extra supply of the holy
balm, filling bamboo tubes for the worshipers to take home with them for good
luck. As he poured, he solicited offerings.
       "This temple is poor, so leave as much as you can. Especially you rich
folks—I know who you are; you're wearing those fine silks and embroidered
obis. You have a lot of money. You must have a lot of troubles too. If you leave a
hundredweight of cash for your tea, your worries will be a hundredweight
lighter."
       On the other side of the flower temple, Otsū was seated at a black-
lacquered table. Her face glowed light pink, like the flowers all around her.
Wearing her new obi and writing charms on pieces of five-colored paper, she
wielded her brush deftly, occasionally dipping it in a gold-lacquered ink box to
her right. She wrote:


           Swiftly and keenly,
           On this best of days,
           The eighth of the fourth month,
           Bring judgment to bear on those
           Insects that devour the crops.


      From time immemorial it had been thought in these parts that hanging this
practical-minded poem on the wall could protect one from not only bugs, but
disease and ill fortune as well. Otsū wrote the same verse scores of times—so

often, in fact, that her wrist started to throb and her calligraphy began to reflect
her fatigue.
       Stopping to rest for a moment, she called out to Takuan: "Stop trying to
rob these people. You're taking too much."
       "I'm talking to those who already have too much. It's become a burden. It's
the essence of charity to relieve them of it," he replied.
       "By that reasoning, common burglars are all holy men."
       Takuan was too busy collecting offerings to reply. "Here, here," he said to
the jostling crowd. "Don't push, take your time, just get in line. You'll have your
chance to lighten your purses soon enough."
       "Hey, priest!" said a young man who'd been admonished for elbowing in.
"You mean me?" Takuan said, pointing to his nose.
      "Yeah. You keep telling us to wait our turn, but then you serve the women
      first."
      "I like women as much as the next man."
      "You must be one of those lecherous monks we're always hearing stories
      about."
       "That's enough, you tadpole! Do you think I don't know why you're here!
You didn't come to honor the Buddha, or to take home a charm. You came to get
a good look at Otsū! Come on now, own up—isn't that so? You won't get
anywhere with women, you know, if you act like a miser."
       Otsū's face turned scarlet. "Takuan, stop it! Stop right now, or I'm really
going to get mad!"
       To rest her eyes, Otsū again looked up from her work and out over the
crowd. Suddenly she caught a glimpse of a face and dropped her brush with a
clatter. She jumped to her feet, almost toppling the table, but the face had already
vanished, like a fish disappearing in the sea. Oblivious of all around her, she
dashed to the temple porch, shouting, "Takezō! Takezō!"
