The Comb


       At five feet eight or nine, Takezō was tall for people of his time. His body
was like a fine steed's: strong and supple, with long, sinewy limbs. His lips were
full and crimson, and his thick black eyebrows fell short of being bushy by
virtue of their fine shape. Extending well beyond the outer corners of his eyes,
they served to accentuate his manliness. The villagers called him "the child of a
fat year," an expression used only about children whose features were larger than
average. Far from an insult, the nickname nonetheless set him apart from the
other youngsters, and for this reason caused him considerable embarrassment in
his early years.
       Although it was never used in reference to Matahachi, the same expression
could have been applied to him as well. Somewhat shorter and stockier than
Takezō, he was barrel-chested and round-faced, giving an impression of joviality
if not downright buffoonery. His prominent, slightly protruding eyes were given
to shifting when he talked, and most jokes made at his expense hinged on his
resemblance to the frogs that croaked unceasingly through the summer nights.
       Both youths were at the height of their growing years, and thus quick to
recover from most ailments. By the time Takezō's wounds had completely
healed, Matahachi could no longer stand his incarceration. He took to pacing the
woodshed and complaining endlessly about being cooped up. More than once he
made the mistake of saying he felt like a cricket in a damp, dark hole, leaving
himself wide open to Takezō's retort that frogs and crickets are supposed to like
such living arrangements. At some point, Matahachi must have begun peeping
into the house, because one day he leaned over to his cellmate as if to impart
some earth-shattering news. "Every evening," he whispered gravely, "the widow
puts powder on her face and pretties herself up!" Takezō's face became that of a
girl-hating twelve-year-old detecting defection, a budding interest in "them," in
his closest friend. Matahachi had turned traitor, and the look was one of
unmistakable disgust.
       Matahachi began going to the house and sitting by the hearth with Akemi
and her youthful mother. After three or four days of chatting and joking with
them, the convivial guest became one of the family. He stopped going back to
the woodshed even at night, and the rare times he did, he had sake on his breath

and tried to entice Takezō into the house by singing the praises of the good life
just a few feet away.
       "You're crazy!" Takezō would reply in exasperation. "You're going to get
us killed, or at least picked up. We lost, we're stragglers—can't you get that
through your head? We have to be careful and lie low until things cool down."
       He soon grew tired of trying to reason with his pleasure-loving friend,
however, and started instead to cut him short with curt replies:
       "I don't like sake," or sometimes: "I like it out here. It's cozy."
       But Takezō was going stir-crazy too. He was bored beyond endurance, and
eventually showed signs of weakening. "Is it really safe?" he'd ask. "This
neighborhood, I mean? No sign of patrols? You're sure?"
       After being entombed for twenty days in the woodshed, he finally emerged
like a half-starved prisoner of war. His skin had the translucent, waxen look of
death, all the more apparent as he stood beside his sun-and-sake-reddened friend.
He squinted up at the clear blue sky, and stretching his arms broadly, yawned
extravagantly. When his cavernous mouth finally came closed, one noticed that
his brows had been knit all the while. His face wore a troubled air.
       "Matahachi," he said seriously, "we're imposing on these people. They're
taking a big risk having us around. I think we should start for home."
       "I guess you're right," said Matahachi. "But they're not letting anyone
through the barriers unchecked. The roads to Ise and Kyoto are both impossible,
according to the widow. She says we should stay put until the snow comes. The
girl says so too. She's convinced we should stay hidden, and you know she's out
and about every day."
       "You call sitting by the fire drinking being hidden?"
       "Sure. You know what I did? The other day some of Tokugawa's men—
they're still looking for General Ukita—came snooping around. I got rid of the
bastards just by going out and greeting them." At this point, as Takezō's eyes
widened in disbelief, Matahachi let out a rolling belly laugh. When it subsided,
he went on. "You're safer out in the open than you are crouching in the
woodshed listening for footsteps and going crazy. That's what I've been trying to
tell you." Matahachi doubled up with laughter again, and Takezō shrugged.
       "Maybe you're right. That could be the best way to handle things."
       He still had his reservations, but after this conversation he moved into the
house. Okō, who obviously liked having people, more specifically men, around,
made them feel completely at home. Occasionally, however, she gave them a jolt
by suggesting that one of them marry Akemi. This seemed to fluster Matahachi

more than Takezō, who simply ignored the suggestion or countered it with a
humorous remark.
       It was the season for the succulent, fragrant matsutake, which grows at the
bases of pine trees, and Takezō relaxed enough to go hunting the large
mushrooms on the wooded mountain just behind the house. Akemi, basket in
hand, would search from tree to tree. Each time she picked up their scent, her
innocent voice reverberated through the woods.
       "Takezō, over here! Lots of them!"
       Hunting around nearby, he invariably replied, "There are plenty over here
too."
       Through the pine branches, the autumn sun filtered down on them in thin,
slanting shafts. The carpet of pine needles in the cool shelter of the trees was a
soft dusty rose. When they tired, Akemi would challenge him, giggling. "Let's
see who has the most!"
       "I do," he'd always reply smugly, at which point she'd begin inspecting his
basket.
       This day was no different from the others. "Ha, ha! I knew it!" she cried.
Gleefully triumphant, the way only girls that young can be, with no hint of self-
consciousness or affected modesty, she bent over his basket. "You've got a bunch
of toadstools in your batch!" Then she discarded the poisonous fungi one by one,
not actually counting out loud, but with movements so slow and deliberate
Takezō could hardly ignore them, even with his eyes closed. She flung each one
as far as she could. Her task completed, she looked up, her young face beaming
with self-satisfaction.
      "Now look how many more I have than you!"
      "It's getting late," Takezō muttered. "Let's go home."
      "You're cross because you lost, aren't you?"
       She started racing down the mountainside like a pheasant, but suddenly
stopped dead in her tracks, an expression of alarm clouding her face.
Approaching diagonally across the grove, halfway down the slope, was a
mountain of a man; his strides were long and languorous, and his glaring eyes
were trained directly on the frail young girl before him. He looked frighteningly
primitive. Everything about him smacked of the struggle to survive, and he had a
distinct air of bellicosity: ferocious bushy eyebrows and a thick, curling upper
lip; a heavy sword, a cloak of mail, and an animal skin wrapped around him.
       "Akemi!" he roared, as he came closer to her. He grinned broadly, showing
a row of yellow, decaying teeth, but Akemi's face continued to register nothing

but horror.
       "Is that wonderful mama of yours home?" he asked with labored sarcasm.
       "Yes," came a peep of a reply.
       "Well, when you go home, I want you to tell her something. Would you do
       that for me?" He spoke mock politely.
       "Yes."
        His tone became harsh. "You tell her she's not putting anything over on
me, trying to make money behind my back. You tell her I'll be around soon for
my cut. Have you got that?"
        Akemi said nothing.
        "She probably thinks I don't know about it, but the guy she sold the goods
to came straight to me. I bet you were going to Sekigahara too, weren't you, little
one?"
        "No, of course not!" she protested weakly.
        "Well, never mind. Just tell her what I said. If she pulls any more fast ones,
I'll kick her out of the neighborhood." He glared at the girl for a moment, then
lumbered off in the direction of the marsh.
        Takezō turned his eyes from the departing stranger and looked at Akemi
with concern. "Who on earth was that?"
        Akemi, her lips still trembling, answered wearily, "His name is Tsujikaze.
He comes from the village of Fuwa." Her voice was barely above a whisper.
"He's a freebooter, isn't he?"
       "Yes."
       "What's he so worked up about?"
       She stood there without answering.
       "I won't tell anybody," he assured her. "Can't you even tell me?"
        Akemi, obviously miserable, seemed to be searching for words. Suddenly
she leaned against Takezō's chest and pleaded, "Promise you won't tell anyone?"
       "Who am I going to tell? The Tokugawa samurai?"
       "Remember the night you first saw me? At Sekigahara?"
       "Of course I remember."
       "Well, haven't you figured out yet what I was doing?"
       "No. I haven't thought about it," he said with a straight face.
       "Well, I was stealing!" She looked at him closely, gauging his reaction.
       "Stealing?"
        "After a battle, I go to the battlefield and take things off the dead soldiers:
swords, scabbard ornaments, incense bags—anything we can sell." She looked at

him again for a sign of disapproval, but his face betrayed none. "It scares me,"
she sighed, then, turning pragmatic, "but we need the money for food and if I say
I don't want to go, Mother gets furious."
       The sun was still fairly high in the sky. At Akemi's suggestion, Takezō sat
down on the grass. Through the pines, they could look down on the house in the
marsh.
       Takezō nodded to himself, as if figuring something out. A bit later he said,
"Then that story about cutting mugwort in the mountains. Making it into moxa.
That was all a lie?"
       "Oh, no. We do that too! But Mother has such expensive tastes. We'd never
be able to make a living on moxa. When my father was alive, we lived in the
biggest house in the village—in all seven villages of Ibuki, as a matter of fact.
We had lots of servants, and Mother always had beautiful things."
       "Was your father a merchant?"
       "Oh, no. He was the leader of the local freebooters." Akemi's eyes shone
with pride. It was clear she no longer feared Takezō's reaction and was giving
vent to her true feelings, her jaw set, her small hands tightening into fists as she
spoke. "This Tsujikaze Temma—the man we just met—killed him. At least,
everyone says he did."
       "You mean your father was murdered?"
       Nodding silently, she began in spite of herself to weep, and Takezō felt
something deep inside himself start to thaw. He hadn't felt much sympathy for
the girl at first. Though smaller than most other girls of sixteen, she talked like a
grown woman much of the time, and every once in a while made a quick
movement that put one on guard. But when the tears began to drop from her long
eyelashes, he suddenly melted with pity. He wanted to hug her in his arms, to
protect her.
       All the same, she was not a girl who'd had anything resembling a proper
upbringing. That there was no nobler calling than that of her father seemed to be
something she never questioned. Her mother had persuaded her that it was quite
all right to strip corpses, not in order to eat, but in order to live nicely. Many out-
and-out thieves would have shrunk from the task.
       During the long years of feudal strife, it had reached the point where all
the shiftless good-for-nothings in the countryside drifted into making their living
this way. People had more or less come to expect it of them. When war broke
out, the local military rulers even made use of their services, rewarding them
generously for setting fire to enemy supplies, spreading false rumors, stealing

horses from enemy camps and the like. Most often their services were bought,
but even when they were not, a war offered a host of opportunities; besides
foraging among corpses for valuables, they could sometimes even wangle
rewards for slaying samurai whose heads they'd merely stumbled upon and
picked up. One large battle made it possible for these unscrupulous pilferers to
live comfortably for six months or a year.
       During the most turbulent times, even the ordinary farmer and woodcutter
had learned to profit from human misery and bloodshed. The fighting on the
outskirts of their village might keep these simple souls from working, but they
had ingeniously adapted to the situation and discovered how to pick over the
remains of human life like vultures. Partly because of these intrusions, the
professional looters maintained strict surveillance over their respective
territories. It was an ironclad rule that poachers—namely, brigands who
trespassed on the more powerful brigands' turf—could not go unpunished. Those
who dared infringe on the assumed rights of these thugs were liable to cruel
retribution.
       Akemi shivered and said, "What'll we do? Temma's henchmen are on their
way here, I just know it."
       "Don't worry," Takezō reassured her. "If they do show up, I'll greet them
personally."
       When they came down from the mountain, twilight had descended on the
marsh, and all was still. A smoke trail from the bath fire at the house crept along
the top of a row of tall rushes like an airborne undulating snake. Okō, having
finished applying her nightly makeup, was standing idly at the back door. When
she saw her daughter approaching side by side with Takezō, she shouted,
"Akemi, what have you been doing out so late?"
       There was sternness in her eye and voice. The girl, who had been walking
along absentmindedly, was brought up short. She was more sensitive to her
mother's moods than to anything else in the world. Her mother had both nurtured
this sensitivity and learned to exploit it, to manipulate her daughter like a puppet
with a mere look or gesture. Akemi quickly fled Takezō's side and, blushing
noticeably, ran ahead and into the house.
       The next day Akemi told her mother about Tsujikaze Temma. Okō flew
into a rage
       "Why didn't you tell me immediately?" she screamed, rushing around like
a madwoman, tearing at her hair, taking things out of drawers and closets and
piling them all together in the middle of the room.

        "Matahachi! Takezō! Give me a hand! We have to hide everything."
        Matahachi shifted a board pointed to by Oka and hoisted himself up above
the ceiling. There wasn't much space between the ceiling and the rafters. One
could barely crawl about, but it served Okō's purpose, and most likely that of her
departed husband. Takezō, standing on a stool between mother and daughter,
began handing things up to Matahachi one by one. If Takezō hadn't heard
Akemi's story the day before, he would've been amazed at the variety of articles
he now saw.
        Takezō knew the two of them had been at this for a long time, but even so,
it was astonishing how much they had accumulated. There was a dagger, a spear
tassel, a sleeve from a suit of armor, a helmet without a crown, a miniature,
portable shrine, a Buddhist rosary, a banner staff. . . . There was even a lacquered
saddle, beautifully carved and ornately decorated with gold, silver and mother-
of-pearl inlay.
        From the opening in the ceiling Matahachi peered out, a perplexed look on
his face. "Is that everything?"
        "No, there's one thing more," said Okō, rushing off. In a moment she was
back, bearing a four-foot sword of black oak. Takezō started passing it up to
Matahachi's outstretched arms, but the weight, the curve, the perfect balance of
the weapon impressed him so deeply that he could not let it go.
        He turned to Okō., a sheepish look on his face. "Do you think I could have
this?" he asked, his eyes showing a new vulnerability. He glanced at his feet, as
if to say he knew he'd done nothing to deserve the sword.
        "Do you really want it?" she said softly, a motherly tone in her voice. "Yes
. . . Yes . . . I really do!"
        Although she didn't actually say he could have it, she smiled, showing a
dimple, and Takezō knew the sword was his. Matahachi jumped down from the
ceiling, bursting with envy. He fingered the sword covetously, making Okō
laugh.
        "See how the little man pouts because he didn't get a present!" She tried to
placate him by giving him a handsome leather purse beaded with agate.
Matahachi didn't look very happy with it. His eyes kept shifting to the black-oak
sword. His feelings were hurt and the purse did little to assuage his wounded
pride.
        When her husband was alive, Okō had apparently acquired the habit of
taking a leisurely, steaming hot bath every evening, putting on her makeup, and
then drinking a bit of sake. In short, she spent the same amount of time on her

toilette as the highest-paid geisha. It was not the sort of luxury that ordinary
people could afford, but she insisted on it and had even taught Akemi to follow
the same routine, although the girl found it boring and the reasons for it
unfathomable. Not only did Okō like to live well; she was determined to remain
young forever.
       That evening, as they sat around the recessed floor hearth, Okō poured
Matahachi's sake and tried to persuade Takezō to have some as well. When he
refused, she put the cup in his hand, seized him by the wrist and forced him to
raise it to his lips.
       "Men are supposed to be able to drink," she chided. "If you can't do it
alone, I'll help."
       From time to time, Matahachi stared uneasily at her. Okō, conscious of his
gaze, became even more familiar with Takezō. Placing her hand playfully on his
knee, she began humming a popular love song.
      By this time, Matahachi had had enough. Suddenly turning to Takezō, he
      blurted out, "We ought to be moving on soon!"
      This had the desired effect. "But . . . but ... where would you go?" Okō
      stammered.
      "Back to Miyamoto. My mother's there, and so is my fiancée."
       Momentarily taken by surprise, Okō swiftly regained her composure. Her
eyes narrowed to slits, her smile froze, her voice turned acid. "Well, please
accept my apologies for delaying you, for taking you in and giving you a home.
If there's a girl waiting for you, you'd better hurry on back. Far be it from me to
keep you!"


      After receiving the black-oak sword, Takezō was never without it. He
derived an indescribable pleasure from simply holding it. Often he'd squeeze the
handle tightly or run its blunt edge along his palm, just to feel the perfect
proportion of the curve to the length. When he slept, he hugged it to his body.
The cool touch of the wooden surface against his cheek reminded him of the
floor of the dōjō where he'd practiced sword techniques in winter. This nearly
perfect instrument of both art and death reawakened in him the fighting spirit he
had inherited from his father.
      Takezō had loved his mother, but she had left his father and moved away
when he was still small, leaving him alone with Munisai, a martinet who
wouldn't have known how to spoil a child in the unlikely event that he had

wanted to. In his father's presence, the boy had always felt awkward and
frightened, never really at ease. When he was nine years old, he'd so craved a
kind word from his mother that he had run away from home and gone all the
way to Harima Province, where she was living. Takezō never learned why his
mother and father had separated, and at that age, an explanation might not have
helped much. She had married another samurai, by whom she had one more
child.
       Once the little runaway had reached Harima, he wasted no time in locating
his mother. On that occasion, she took him to a wooded area behind the local
shrine, so they wouldn't be seen, and there, with tear-filled eyes, hugged him
tightly and tried to explain why he had to go back to his father. Takezō never
forgot the scene; every detail of it remained vividly in his mind as long as he
lived.
       Of course, Munisai, being the samurai he was, had sent people to retrieve
his son the moment he learned of his disappearance. It was obvious where the
child had gone. Takezō was returned to Miyamoto like a bundle of firewood,
strapped on the back of an unsaddled horse. Munisai, by way of greeting, had
called him an insolent brat, and in a state of rage verging on hysteria, caned him
until he could cane no more. Takezō remembered more explicitly than anything
else the venom with which his father had spat out his ultimatum: "If you go to
your mother one more time, I'll disown you."
       Not long after this incident, Takezō learned that his mother had fallen ill
and died. Her death had the effect of transforming him from a quiet, gloomy
child into the village bully. Even Munisai was intimidated eventually. When he
took a truncheon to the boy, the latter countered with a wooden staff. The only
one who ever stood up to him was Matahachi, also the son of a samurai; the
other children all did Takezō's bidding. By the time he was twelve or thirteen, he
was almost as tall as an adult.
       One year, a wandering swordsman named Arima Kihei put up a gold-
emblazoned banner and offered to take on challengers from the village. Takezō
killed him effortlessly, eliciting praise for his valor from the villagers. Their high
opinion of him, however, was short-lived, since as he grew older, he became
increasingly unmanageable and brutal. Many thought him sadistic, and soon,
whenever he appeared on the scene, people gave him a very wide berth. His
attitude toward them grew to reflect their coldness.
       When his father, as harsh and unrelenting as ever, finally died, the cruel
streak in Takezō widened even more. If it had not been for his older sister, Ogin,

Takezō would probably have gotten himself into something far over his head and
been driven out of the village by an angry mob. Fortunately, he loved his sister
and, powerless before her tears, usually did whatever she asked.
        Going off to war with Matahachi was a turning point for Takezō. It
indicated that somehow he wanted to take his place in society alongside other
men. The defeat at Sekigahara had abruptly curtailed such hopes, and he found
himself once again plunged into the dark reality from which he thought he had
escaped. Still, he was a youth blessed with the sublime lightheartedness that
flourishes only in an age of strife. When he slept, his face became as placid as an
infant's, completely untroubled by thoughts of the morrow. He had his share of
dreams, asleep or awake, but he suffered few real disappointments. Having so
little to begin with, he had little to lose, and although he was in a sense uprooted,
he was also unfettered by shackles.
        Breathing deeply and steadily, holding on to his wooden sword tightly,
Takezō at this moment may well have been dreaming, a faint smile on his lips as
visions of his gentle sister and his peaceful hometown cascaded like a mountain
waterfall before his closed, heavily lashed eyes. Okō, carrying a lamp, slipped
into his room. "What a peaceful face," she marveled under her breath; she
reached out and lightly touched his lips with her fingers.
        Then she blew out the lamp and lay down beside him. Curling up catlike,
she inched closer and closer to his body, her whitened face and colorful
nightgown, really too youthful for her, hidden by the darkness. The only sound
that could be heard was that of dewdrops dripping onto the windowsill.
       "I wonder if he's still a virgin," she mused as she reached out to remove his
       wooden sword.
       The instant she touched it, Takezō was on his feet and shouting, "Thief!
       Thief!"
       Okō was thrown over onto the lamp, which cut into her shoulder and chest.
        Takezō was wrenching her arm without mercy. She screamed out in pain.
Astonished, he released her. "Oh, it's you. I thought it was a thief." "Oooh,"
moaned Okō. "That hurt!"
        "I'm sorry. I didn't know it was you."
        "You don't know your own strength. You almost tore my arm off." "I said I
was sorry. What are you doing here, anyway?"
        Ignoring his innocent query, she quickly recovered from her arm injury
and tried to coil the same limb around his neck, cooing, "You don't have to
apologize. Takezō . . ." She ran the back of her hand softly against his cheek.

        "Hey! What are you doing? Are you crazy?" he shouted, shrinking away
from her touch.
        "Don't make so much noise, you idiot. You know how I feel about you."
She went on trying to fondle him, with him swatting at her like a man attacked
by a swarm of bees.
       "Yes, and I'm very grateful. Neither of us will ever forget how kind you've
       been, taking us in and all."
       "I don't mean that, Takezō. I'm talking about my woman's feelings—the
       lovely, warm feeling I have for you."
       "Wait a minute," he said, jumping up. "I'll light the lamp!"
       "Oh, how can you be so cruel," she whimpered, moving to embrace him
       again.
       "Don't do that!" he cried indignantly. "Stop it—I mean it!"
       Something in his voice, something intense and resolute, frightened Okō into
       halting her attack.
        Takezō felt his bones wobbling, his teeth rattling. Never had he
encountered such a formidable adversary. Not even when he'd looked up at the
horses galloping past him at Sekigahara had his heart palpitated so. He sat
cringing in the corner of the room.
        "Go away, please," he pleaded. "Go back to your own room. If you don't,
I'll call Matahachi. I'll wake the whole house up!"
        Okō did not budge. She sat there in the dark, breathing heavily and staring
at him with narrowed eyes. She wasn't about to be rebuffed. "Takezō," she cooed
again. "Don't you understand how I feel?"
        He made no reply.
        "Don't you?"
        "Yes, but do you understand how I feel, being snuck up on in my sleep,
frightened to death and mauled by a tiger in the dark?"
        It was her turn to be silent. A low whisper, almost a growl, emerged from a
deep part of her throat. She said each syllable with a vengeance. "How can you
embarrass me so?"
        "I embarrass you?"
        "Yes. This is mortifying."
        They were both so tense they hadn't noticed the knocking at the door,
which had apparently been going on for some time. Now the pounding was
punctuated by shouts. "What's going on in there? Are you deaf? Open the door!"
        A light appeared in the crack between the sliding rain shutters. Akemi was

already awake. Then Matahachi's footsteps thudded toward them and his voice
called, "What's going on?"
       From the hallway now, Akemi cried out in alarm, "Mother! Are you in
there? Please answer me!"
       Blindly Okō scrambled back into her own room, just adjoining Takezō's,
and answered from there. The men outside appeared to have pried open the
shutters and stormed into the house. When she reached the hearth room she saw
six or seven pairs of broad shoulders crowded into the adjacent, dirt-floored
kitchen, which was a big step down, since it was set at a lower level than the
other rooms.
       One of the men shouted, "It's Tsujikaze Temma. Give us some light!"
       The men barged rudely into the main part of the house. They didn't even
stop to remove their sandals, a sure sign of habitual uncouthness. They began
poking around everywhere—in the closets, in the drawers, under the thick straw
tatami covering the floor. Temma seated himself royally by the hearth and
watched as his henchmen systematically ransacked the rooms. He thoroughly
enjoyed being in charge but soon seemed to tire of his own inactivity.
       "This is taking too long," he growled, pounding his fist on the tatami. "You
must have some of it here. Where is it?"
     "I don't know what you're talking about," replied Okō, folding her hands
     over her stomach forbearingly.
     "Don't give me that, woman!" he bellowed. "Where is it? I know it's here!"
     "I don't have a thing!"
     "Nothing?"
     "Nothing."
       "Well, then, maybe you don't. Maybe I have the wrong information. . . .
"He eyed her warily, tugging and scratching at his beard. "That's enough, men!"
he thundered.
       Okō had meanwhile sat down in the next room, with the sliding door wide
open. She had her back to him, but even so she looked defiant, as though telling
him he could go ahead and search wherever he had a mind to.
     "Okō," he called gruffly.
     "What do you want?" came the icy reply.
     "How about a little something to drink?"
     "Would you like some water?"
     "Don't push me . . ." he warned menacingly.
     "The sake's in there. Drink it if you want to."

      "Aw, Okō," he said, softening, almost admiring her for her coldhearted
stubbornness. "Don't be that way. I haven't been to visit for a long time. Is this
any way to treat an old friend?"
      "Some visit!"
      "Now, take it easy. You're partly to blame, you know. I've been hearing
about what the 'moxa man's widow' has been up to from too many different
people to think it's all lies. I hear you've been sending your lovely daughter out
to rob corpses. Now, why would she be doing a thing like that?"
      "Show me your proof!" she shrieked. "Where's the proof!"
      "If I'd been planning to dig it out, I wouldn't have given Akemi advance
warning. You know the rules of the game. It's my territory, and I've got to go
through the motions of searching your house. Otherwise, everybody'd get the
idea they could get away with the same thing. Then where'd I be? I've gotta
protect myself, you know!"
     She stared at him in steely silence, her head half turned toward him, chin
     and nose proudly raised.
     "Well, I'm going to let you off this time. But just remember, I'm being
     especially nice to you."
     "Nice to me? Who, you? That's a laugh!"
     "Okō," he coaxed, "come here and pour me a drink."
      When she showed no sign of moving, he exploded. "You crazy bitch! Can't
you see that if you were nice to me, you wouldn't have to live like this?" He
calmed down a bit, then advised her,
     "Think it over for a while."
     "I'm overcome by your kindness, sir," came the venomous reply.
     "You don't like me?"
     "Just answer me this: Who killed my husband? I suppose you expect me to
     believe that you don't know?"
     "If you want to take revenge on whoever it was, I'll be happy to help. Any
     way I can."
     "Don't play dumb!"
     "What do you mean by that?"
      "You seem to hear so much from people. Haven't they told you that it was
you yourself who killed him? Haven't you heard that Tsujikaze Temma was the
murderer? Everyone else knows it. I may be the widow of a freebooter, but I
haven't sunk so low that I'd play around with my husband's killer."
      "You had to go and say it, didn't you—couldn't leave well enough alone,

eh!" With a rueful laugh, he drained the sake cup in one gulp and poured another.
"You know, you really shouldn't say things like that. It's not good for your health
—or your pretty daughter's!"
       "I'll bring Akemi up properly, and after she's married, I'll get back at you.
Mark my word!"
       Temma laughed until his shoulders, his whole body, shook like a cake of
bean curd. After he'd downed all the sake he could find, he motioned to one of
his men, who was positioned in a corner of the kitchen, his lance propped
vertically against his shoulder. "You there," he boomed, "push aside some of the
ceiling boards with the butt of your lance!"
       The man did as he was told. As he went around the room, poking at the
ceiling, Okō's treasure trove began falling to the floor like hailstones.
       "Just as I suspected all along," said Temma, getting clumsily to his feet.
"You see it, men. Evidence! She's broken the rules, no question about it. Take
her outside and give her her punishment!"
       The men converged on the hearth room, but abruptly came to a halt. Okō
stood statuesquely in the doorway, as though daring them to lay a hand on her.
Temma, who'd stepped down into the kitchen, called back impatiently, "What are
you waiting for? Bring her out here!"
       Nothing happened. Okō continued to stare the men down, and they
remained as if paralyzed. Temma decided to take over. Clicking his tongue, he
made for Okō, but he, too, stopped short in front of the doorway. Standing
behind Okō, not visible from the kitchen, were two fierce-looking young men.
Takezō was holding the wooden sword low, poised to fracture the shins of the
first comer and anyone else stupid enough to follow. On the other side was
Matahachi, holding a sword high in the air, ready to bring it down on the first
neck that ventured through the doorway. Akemi was nowhere to be seen.
       "So that's how it is," groaned Temma, suddenly remembering the scene on
the mountainside. "I saw that one walking the other day with Akemi—the one
with the stick. Who's the other one?"
       Neither Matahachi nor Takezō said a word, making it clear that they
intended to answer with their weapons. The tension mounted.
       "There aren't supposed to be any men in this house," roared Temma. "You
two . . . You must be from Sekigahara! You better watch your step—I'm warning
you."
       Neither of them moved a muscle.
       "There isn't anybody in these parts who doesn't know the name of

Tsujikaze Temma! I'll show you what we do to stragglers!"
       Silence. Temma waved his men out of the way. One of them backed
straight into the hearth, in the middle of the floor. He let out a yelp and fell in,
sending a shower of sparks from the burning kindling up to the ceiling; in
seconds, the room filled completely with smoke.
       "Aarrgghh!"
       As Temma lunged into the room, Matahachi brought down his sword with
both hands, but the older man was too fast for him and the blow glanced off the
tip of Temma's scabbard. Okō had taken refuge in the nearest corner while
Takezō waited, his black-oak sword horizontally poised. He aimed at Temma's
legs and swung with all his strength. The staff whizzed through the darkness, but
there was no thud of impact. Somehow this bull of a man had jumped up just in
time and on the way down threw himself at Takezō with the force of a boulder.
       Takezō felt as though he were tangling with a bear. This was the strongest
man he had ever fought. Temma grabbed him by the throat and landed two or
three blows that made him think his skull would crack. Then Takezō got his
second wind and sent Temma flying through the air. He landed against the wall,
rocking the house and everything in it. As Takezō raised the wooden sword to
come down on Temma's head, the freebooter rolled over, jumped to his feet, and
fled, with Takezō close on his tail.
       Takezō was determined to not let Temma escape. That would be
dangerous. His mind was made up; when he caught him, he was not going to do
a halfway job of killing him. He would make absolutely certain that not a breath
of life was left.
       That was Takezō's nature; he was a creature of extremes. Even when he
was a small child, there had been something primitive in his blood, something
harking back to the fierce warriors of ancient Japan, something as wild as it was
pure. It knew neither the light of civilization nor the tempering of knowledge.
Nor did it know moderation. It was a natural trait, and the one that had always
prevented his father from liking the boy. Munisai had tried, in the fashion typical
of the military class, to curb his son's ferocity by punishing him severely and
often, but the effect of such discipline had been to make the boy wilder, like a
wild boar whose true ferocity emerges when it is deprived of food. The more the
villagers despised the young roughneck, the more he lorded it over them.
       As the child of nature became a man, he grew bored with swaggering
about the village as though he owned it. It was too easy to intimidate the timid
villagers. He began to dream of bigger things. Sekigahara had given him his first

lesson in what the world was really like. His youthful illusions were shattered—
not that he'd really had many to begin with. It would never have occurred to him
to brood over having failed in his first "real" venture, or to muse on the grimness
of the future. He didn't yet know the meaning of self-discipline, and he'd taken
the whole bloody catastrophe in stride.
      And now, fortuitously, he'd stumbled onto a really big fish—Tsujikaze
Temma, the leader of the freebooters! This was the kind of adversary he had
longed to lock horns with at Sekigahara.
      "Coward!" he yelled. "Stand and fight!"
      Takezō was running like lightning through the pitch-black field, shouting
taunts all the while. Ten paces ahead, Temma was fleeing as if on wings.
Takezō's hair was literally on end, and the wind made a groaning noise as it
swept past his ears. He was happy—happier than he'd ever been in his life. The
more he ran, the closer he came to sheer animal ecstasy.
      He leapt at Temma's back. Blood spurted out at the end of the wooden
sword, and a bloodcurdling scream pierced the silent night. The freebooter's
hulking frame fell to the ground with a leaden thud and rolled over. The skull
was smashed to bits, the eyes popped out of their sockets. After two or three
more heavy blows to the body, broken ribs protruded from the skin.
      Takezō raised his arm, wiping rivers of sweat from his brow.
      "Satisfied, Captain?" he asked triumphantly.
      He started nonchalantly back toward the house. An observer new on the
scene might have thought him out for an evening stroll, with not a care in the
world. He felt free, no remorse, knowing that if the other man had won, he
himself would be lying there, dead and alone.
      Out of the darkness came Matahachi's voice. "Takezō, is that you?"
"Yeah," he replied dully. "What's up?"
      Matahachi ran up to him and announced breathlessly, "I killed one! How
about you?"
      "I killed one too."
      Matahachi held up his sword, soaked in blood right down to the braiding
on the hilt. Squaring his shoulders with pride, he said, "The others ran away.
These thieving bastards aren't much as fighters! No guts! Can only stand up to
corpses, ha! Real even match, I'd say, ha, ha, ha."
      Both of them were stained with gore and as contented as a pair of well-fed
kittens. Chattering happily, they headed for the lamp visible in the distance,
Takezō with his bloody stick, Matahachi with his bloody sword.

       A stray horse stuck his head through the window and looked around the
house. His snorting woke the two sleepers. Cursing the animal, Takezō gave him
a smart slap on the nose. Matahachi stretched, yawned and remarked on how
well he'd slept.
      "The sun's pretty high already," said Takezō.
      "You suppose it's afternoon?"
      "Couldn't be!"
      After a sound sleep, the events of the night before were all but forgotten.
      For these two, only today and tomorrow existed.
       Takezō ran out behind the house and stripped to the waist. Crouching
down beside the clean, cool mountain stream, he splashed water on his face,
doused his hair and washed his chest and back. Looking up, he inhaled deeply
several times, as though trying to drink in the sunlight and all the air in the sky.
Matahachi went sleepily into the hearth room, where he bid a cheery good
morning to Okō and Akemi.
       "Why, what are you two charming ladies wearing sour pusses for?" "Are
we?"
       "Yes, most definitely. You look like you're both in mourning. What's there
to be gloomy about? We killed your husband's murderer and gave his henchmen
a beating they won't soon forget."
       Matahachi's dismay was not hard to fathom. He thought the widow and her
daughter would be overjoyed at news of Temma's death. Indeed, the night
before, Akemi had clapped her hands with glee when she first heard about it. But
Okō had looked uneasy from the first, and today, slouching dejectedly by the
fire, she looked even worse.
       "What's the matter with you?" he asked, thinking she was the most difficult
woman in the world to please. "What gratitude!" he said to himself, taking the
bitter tea that Akemi had poured for him and squatting down on his haunches.
       Okō smiled wanly, envying the young, who know not the ways of the
world. "Matahachi," she said wearily, "you don't seem to understand. Temma
had hundreds of followers."
       "Of course he did. Crooks like him always do. We're not afraid of the kind
of people who follow the likes of him. If we could kill him, why should we be
afraid of his underlings? If they try to get at us, Takezō and I will just—"
       "—will just do nothing!" interrupted Okō.

       Matahachi pulled back his shoulders and said, "Who says so? Bring on as
many of them as you like! They're nothing but a bunch of worms. Or do you
think Takezō and I are cowards, that we're just going to slither away on our
bellies in retreat? What do you take us for?"
       "You're not cowards, but you are childish! Even to me. Temma has a
younger brother named Tsujikaze Kōhei, and if he comes after you, the two of
you rolled into one wouldn't have a chance!"
       This was not the kind of talk Matahachi especially liked to hear, but as she
went on, he started thinking that maybe she had a point. Tsujikaze Kōhei
apparently had a large band of followers around Yasugawa in Kiso, and not only
that: he was expert in the martial arts and unusually adept at catching people off
their guard. So far, no one Kōhei had publicly announced he would kill had lived
out his normal life. To Matahachi's way of thinking, it was one thing if a person
attacked you in the open. It was quite another thing if he snuck up on you when
you were fast asleep.
       "That's a weak point with me," he admitted. "I sleep like a log."
       As he sat holding his jaw and thinking, Okō came to the conclusion that
there was nothing to do but abandon the house and their present way of life and
go somewhere far away. She asked Matahachi what he and Takezō would do.
       "I'll talk it over with him," replied Matahachi. "Wonder where he's gone
off to?"
       He walked outside and looked around, but Takezō was nowhere in sight.
After a time he shaded his eyes, looked off into the distance and spotted Takezō
riding around in the foothills, bareback on the stray horse that had woken them
with his neighing.
       "He doesn't have a care in the world," Matahachi said to himself, gruffly
envious. Cupping his hands around his mouth, he shouted, "Hey, you! Come
home! We've got to talk!"
      A little while later they lay in the grass together, chewing on stalks of grass,
      discussing what they should do next.
      Matahachi said, "Then you think we should head home?"
      "Yes, I do. We can't stay with these two women forever."
      "No, I guess not."
      "I don't like women." Takezō was sure of that at least.
      "All right. Let's go, then."
       Matahachi rolled over and looked up at the sky. "Now that we've made up
our minds, I want to get moving. I suddenly realized how much I miss Otsū, how

much I want to see her. Look up there! There's a cloud that looks just like her
profile. See! That part's just like her hair after she's washed it." Matahachi was
kicking his heels into the ground and pointing to the sky.
      Takezō's eyes followed the retreating form of the horse he had just set free.
Like many of the vagabonds who live in the fields, stray horses seemed to him to
be good-natured things. When you're through with them, they ask for nothing;
they just go off quietly somewhere by themselves.
      From the house Akemi summoned them to dinner. They stood up. "Race
you!" cried Takezō.
      "You're on!" countered Matahachi.
      Akemi clapped her hands with delight as the two of them sped neck and
neck through the tall grass, leaving a thick trail of dust in their wake.
      After dinner, Akemi grew pensive. She had just learned that the two men
had decided to go back to their homes. It had been fun having them in the house,
and she wanted it to go on forever.
      "You silly thing!" chided her mother. "Why are you moping so?" Okō was
applying her makeup, as meticulously as ever, and as she scolded the girl, she
stared into her mirror at Takezō. He caught her gaze and suddenly recalled the
pungent fragrance of her hair the night she invaded his room.
      Matahachi, who had taken the big sake jar down from a shelf, plopped
down next to Takezō and began filling a small warming bottle, just as though he
were master of the house. Since this was to be their last night all together, they
planned to drink their fill. Okō seemed to be taking special care with her face.
      "Let's not leave a drop undrunk!" she said. "There's no point in leaving it
here for the rats."
      "Or the worms!" Matahachi chimed in.
      They emptied three large jars in no time. Okō leaned against Matahachi
and started fondling him in a way that made Takezō turn his head in
embarrassment.
      "I . . . I . . . can't walk," mumbled Okō drunkenly.
      Matahachi escorted her to her pallet, her head leaning heavily on his
shoulder. Once there, she turned to Takezō and said spitefully, "You, Takezō, you
sleep over there, by yourself. You like sleeping by yourself. Isn't that right?"
      Without a murmur, he lay down where he was. He was very drunk and it
was very late.
      By the time he woke up, it was broad daylight. The moment he opened his
eyes, he sensed it. Something told him the house was empty. The things Okō and

Akemi had piled together the day before for the trip were gone. There were no
clothes, no sandals—and no Matahachi.
      He called out, but there was no reply, nor did he expect one. A vacant
house has an aura all its own. There was no one in the yard, no one behind the
house, no one in the woodshed. The only trace of his companions was a bright
red comb lying beside the open mouth of the water pipe.
      "Matahachi's a pig!" he said to himself.
      Sniffing the comb, he again recalled how Okō had tried to seduce him that
evening not long ago. "This," he thought, "is what defeated Matahachi." The
very idea made him boil with anger.
      "Fool!" he cried out loud. "What about Otsū? What do you plan to do
about her? Hasn't she been deserted too many times already, you pig?"
      He stamped the cheap comb under his foot. He wanted to cry in rage, not
for himself, but out of pity for Otsū, whom he could picture so clearly waiting
back in the village.
      As he sat disconsolately in the kitchen, the stray horse looked in the
doorway impassively. Finding that Takezō would not pat his nose, he wandered
over to the sink and began lazily to lick some grains of rice that had stuck there.
