The Birth of Musashi 
Takezo waited on the outskirts of the castle town of Himeji, sometimes 
keeping out of sight under Hanada Bridge but more often standing on the bridge 
unobtrusively surveying the passersby. When not in the immediate vicinity of the 
bridge, he would make short excursions around town, careful to keep his hat low 
and his face concealed, like a beggar's, behind a piece of straw matting. 
It baffled him that Otsu had not yet appeared; only a week had gone by 
since she swore to wait there—not a hundred but a thousand days. Once Takezo 
had made a promise, he was loath to break it. But with every passing moment he 
grew more and more tempted to be on the move, though his promise to Otsu was 
not the only reason he made his way to Himeji. He also had to find out where 
they were keeping Ogin. 
He was near the center of town one day when he heard a voice shouting 
his name. Footsteps came running after him. He looked up sharply, to see 
Takuan approaching, calling, "Takezo! Wait!" 
Takezo was startled, and as usual in the presence of this monk, felt slightly 
humiliated. He had thought his disguise was foolproof and had been sure that no 
one, not even Takuan, would recognize him. 
The monk grabbed him by the wrist. "Come with me," he commanded. 
The urgency in his voice was impossible to ignore. "And don't make any trouble. 
I've spent a lot of time looking for you." 
Takezo followed meekly. He had no idea where they were going, but he 
once again found himself powerless to resist this particular man. He wondered 
why. He was free now, and for all he knew they were headed straight back to the 
dreaded tree in Miyamoto. Or perhaps into a castle dungeon. He had suspected 
they had his sister locked up somewhere in the castle's confines, but he hadn't a 
shred of evidence to back this up. He hoped he was right: if he, too, was taken 
there, at least they could die together. If they had to die, he could think of no one 

Pagina 134 di 1295

else he loved enough to share the final moments of precious life with. 
Himeji Castle loomed before his eyes. He could see now why it was called 
the "White Crane Castle": the stately edifice stood upon huge stone ramparts, 
like a great and proud bird descended from the heavens. Takuan preceded him 
across the wide arcing bridge spanning the outer moat. A row of guards stood at 
attention before the riveted iron gate. The sunlight glancing off their drawn 
lances made Takezo, for a split second, hesitant to pass. Takuan, without even 
turning, sensed this and with a slightly impatient gesture urged him to keep 
moving. Passing under the gate turret, they approached the second gate, where 
the soldiers looked even more tense and alert, ready to fight at a moment's 
notice. This was the castle of a daimyo. It would take its inhabitants a while to 
relax and accept the fact that the country was successfully unified. Like many 
other castles of the time, it was far from accustomed to the luxury of peace. 
Takuan summoned the captain of the guard. "I've brought him," he 
announced. Handing Takezo over, the monk advised the man to take good care 
of him as previously instructed, but added, "Be careful. He's a lion cub with 
fangs. He's far from tamed. If you tease him, he bites." 
Takuan went through the second gate to the central compound, where the 
daimyo's mansion was located. Apparently he knew the way well; he needed 
neither a guide nor directions. He barely raised his head as he walked and not a 
soul interrupted his progress. 
Heeding Takuan's instructions, the captain didn't lay a finger on his charge. 
He simply asked Takezo to follow him. Takezo silently obeyed. They soon 
arrived at a bathhouse, and the captain instructed him to go in and get cleaned 
up. At this point Takezo's spine stiffened, for he remembered all too well his last 
bath, at Osugi's house, and the trap from which he had narrowly escaped. He 
folded his arms and tried to think, stalling for time and inspecting the 
surroundings. It was all so peaceful—an island of tranquility where a daimyo 
could, when not plotting strategies, enjoy the luxuries of life. Soon a servant 
bearing a black cotton kimono and hakama arrived, bowing and saying politely, 
"I'll lay these here. You can put them on when you come out." 
Takezo nearly wept. The outfit included not only a folding fan and some 
tissue paper, but a pair of long and short samurai swords. Everything was simple 
and inexpensive, but nothing was lacking. He was being treated like a human 
being again and wanted to lift the clean cotton to his face, rub it to his cheek and 
inhale its freshness. He turned and entered the bathhouse. 
Ikeda Terumasa, lord of the castle, leaned on an armrest and gazed out into 
the garden. He was a short man, with a cleanly shaven head and dark pockmarks 
lining his face. Although not dressed in formal attire, his countenance was stern 

Pagina 135 di 1295

and dignified. 
"Is that him?" he asked Takuan, pointing his folding fan. 
"Yes, that's him," answered the monk with a deferential bow. 
"He has a good face. You did well to save him." 
"He owes his life to you, your lordship. Not me." 
"That's not so, Takuan, and you know it. If I just had a handful of men like 
you under my command, no doubt a lot of useful people would be saved, and the 
world would be the better for it." The daimyo sighed. "My trouble is that all my 
men think their sole duty is to tie people up or behead them." 
An hour later, Takezo was seated in the garden beyond the veranda, his 
head bowed and his hands resting flat on his knees in an attitude of respectful 
attentiveness. 
"Your name is Shimmen Takezo, isn't it?" Lord Ikeda asked. 
Takezo glanced up quickly to see the face of the famous man, then 
respectfully cast his eyes downward again. 
"Yes, sir," he answered clearly. 
"The House of Shimmen is a branch of the Akamatsu family, and 
Akamatsu Masanori, as you well know, was once lord of this castle." 
Takezo's throat went dry. He was, for once, at a loss for words. Having 
always thought of himself as the black sheep of the Shimmen family, with no 
particular feelings of respect or awe for the daimyo, he was nonetheless filled 
with shame at having brought such complete dishonor on his ancestors and his 
family name. His face burned. 
"What you have done is inexcusable," continued Terumasa in a sterner 
tone. "Yes, sir." 
"And I am going to have to punish you for it." Turning to Takuan, he 
asked, "Is it true that my retainer, Aoki Tanzaemon, without my leave, promised 
you that if you captured this man, you could decide and mete out his 
punishment?" 
"I think you can best find that out by asking Tanzaemon directly." "I've 
already questioned him." 

Pagina 136 di 1295

"Then did you think I would lie to you?" 
"Of course not. Tanzaemon has confessed, but I wanted your confirmation. 
Since he is my direct vassal, his oath to you constitutes one from me. Therefore, 
even though I am lord of this fief, I have lost my right to penalize Takezo as I see 
fit. Of course, I will not permit him to go unpunished, but it is up to you what 
form the punishment is to take." 
"Good. That is exactly what I had in mind." 
"Then I assume you have given it some thought. Well, what shall we do 
with him?" 
"I think it would be best to place the prisoner in—what shall we say? 
—'straitened circumstances' for a while." 
"And how do you propose to do that?" 
"I believe you have somewhere in this castle a closed room, one long 
rumored to be haunted?" 
"Yes, I do. The servants refused to enter it, and my retainers avoided it 
consistently, so it went unused. I now leave it as it is, since there is no reason to 
open it again." 
"But don't you think it's beneath the dignity of one of the strongest 
warriors in the Tokugawa realm, you, Ikeda Terumasa, to have a room in your 
castle where a light never shines?" 
"I never thought of it that way." 
"Well, people think of things like that. It's a reflection on your authority 
and prestige. I say we should put a light there." 
"Hmm." 
"If you'll let me make use of that chamber, I'll keep Takezo there until I'm 
ready to pardon him. He's had enough of living in total darkness. You hear that, 
don't you, Takezo?" 
There was not a peep from Takezo, but Terumasa began laughing and said, 
"Fine!" 
It was obvious from their excellent rapport that Takuan had been telling 
Aoki Tanzaemon the truth that night at the temple. He and Terumasa, both 

Pagina 137 di 1295

followers of Zen, seemed to be on friendly, almost brotherly, terms. 
"After you've taken him to his new quarters, why don't you join me in the 
teahouse?" Terumasa asked the monk as he rose to leave. 
"Oh, are you planning to demonstrate once again how inept you are at the 
tea ceremony?" 
"That's not even fair, Takuan. These days I've really started to get the 
knack of it. Come along later and I'll prove to you I'm no longer simply an 
uncouth soldier. I'll be waiting." With that, Terumasa retired to the inner part of 
the mansion. Despite his short stature—he was barely five feet tall—his presence 
seemed to fill the many-storied castle. 
It was always pitch dark high in the donjon, where the haunted room was 
located. There was no calendar here: no spring, no fall, no sounds of everyday 
life. There was only one small lamp, lighting a pale and sallow-cheeked Takezo. 
The topography section of Sun-tzu's Art of War lay open on the low table 
before him. 
Sun-tzu said: 
"Among topographical features, 
There are those that are passable. 
There are those that suspend. 
There are those that confine. 
There are those that are steep. 
There are those that are distant." 
Whenever he came to a passage that particularly appealed to him, like this 
one, he would read it aloud over and over, like a chant. 
He who knows the art of the warrior is not confused in his movements. He 
acts and is not confined. 
Therefore Sun-tzu said, "He who knows himself and knows his enemy wins 
without danger. He who knows the heavens and the earth wins out over all." 

Pagina 138 di 1295

When his eyes blurred from fatigue, he rinsed them with cool water from a 
small bowl he kept beside him. If the oil ran low and the lamp wick sputtered, he 
simply put it out. Around the table was a mountain of books, some in Japanese, 
some in Chinese. Books on Zen, volumes on the history of Japan. Takezo was 
virtually buried in these scholarly tomes. They had all been borrowed from Lord 
Ikeda's collection. 
When Takuan had sentenced him to confinement, he had said, "You may 
read as much as you want. A famous priest of ancient times once said, 'I become 
immersed in the sacred scriptures and read thousands of volumes. When I come 
away, I find that my heart sees more than before.' 
"Think of this room as your mother's womb and prepare to be born anew. 
If you look at it only with your eyes, you will see nothing more than an unlit, 
closed cell. But look again, more closely. Look with your mind and think. This 
room can be the wellspring of enlightenment, the same fountain of knowledge 
found and enriched by sages in the past. It is up to you to decide whether this is 
to be a chamber of darkness or one of light." 
Takezo had long since stopped counting the days. When it was cold, it was 
winter; when hot, summer. He knew little more than that. The air remained the 
same, dank and musty, and the seasons had no bearing on his life. He was almost 
positive, however, that the next time the swallows came to nest in the donjon's 
boarded-over gun slots, it would be the spring of his third year in the womb. 
"I'll be twenty-one years old," he said to himself. Seized by remorse, he 
groaned as if in mourning. "And what have I done in those twenty-one years?" 
Sometimes the memory of his early years pressed in on him unrelentingly, 
engulfing him in grief. He would wail and moan, flail and kick, and sometimes 
sob like a baby. Whole days were swallowed up in agony, which, once it 
subsided, left him spent and lifeless, hair disheveled and heart torn apart. 
Finally, one day, he heard the swallows returning to the donjon eaves. 
Once again, spring had flown from across the seas. 
Not long after its arrival, a voice, now sounding strange, almost painful to 
the ears, inquired, "Takezo, are you well?" 
The familiar head of Takuan appeared at the top of the stairs. Startled and 
much too deeply moved to utter a sound, Takezo grabbed hold of the monk's 
kimono sleeve and pulled him into the room. The servants who brought his food 
had never once spoken a word. He was overjoyed to hear another human voice, 

Pagina 139 di 1295

especially this one. 
"I've just returned from a journey," said Takuan. "You're in your third year 
here now, and I've decided that after gestating this long, you must be pretty well 
formed." 
"I am grateful for your goodness, Takuan. I understand now what you've 
done. How can I ever thank you?" 
"Thank me?" Takuan said incredulously. Then he laughed. "Even though 
you've had no one to converse with but yourself, you've actually learned to speak 
like a human being! Good! Today you will leave this place. And as you do so, 
hug your hard-earned enlightenment to your bosom. You're going to need it 
when you go forth into the world to join your fellow men." 
Takuan took Takezo just as he was to see Lord Ikeda. Although he had 
been relegated to the garden in the previous audience, a place was now made for 
him on the veranda. After the salutations and some perfunctory small talk, 
Terumasa lost no time in asking Takezo to serve as his vassal. 
Takezo declined. He was greatly honored, he explained, but he did not feel 
the time was yet right to go into a daimyo's service. "And if I did so in this 
castle," he said, "ghosts would probably start appearing in the closed room every 
night, just as everyone says they do." 
"Why do you say that? Did they come to keep you company?" 
"If you take a lamp and inspect the room closely, you'll see black spots 
spattering the doors and beams. It looks like lacquer, but it's not. It's human 
blood, most likely blood spilled by the Akamatsus, my forebears, when they 
went down to defeat in this castle." 
"Hmm. You may very well be right." 
"Seeing those stains infuriated me. My blood boiled to think that my 
ancestors, who once ruled over this whole region, ended up being annihilated, 
their souls just blown about in the autumn winds. They died violently, but it was 
a powerful clan and they can be roused. 
"That same blood flows in my veins," he went on, an intense look in his 
eyes. "Unworthy though I am, I am a member of the same clan, and if I stay in 
this castle, the ghosts may rouse themselves and try to reach me. In a sense, they 
already have, by making it clear to me in that room just who I am. But they 
could cause chaos, perhaps rebel and even set off another bloodbath. We are not 
in an era of peace. I owe it to the people of this whole region not to tempt the 
vengeance of my ancestors." 

Pagina 140 di 1295

Terumasa nodded. "I see what you mean. It's better if you leave this castle, 
but where will you go? Do you plan to return to Miyamoto? Live out your life 
there?" 
Takezo smiled silently. "I want to wander about on my own for a while." "I 
see," the lord replied, turning to Takuan. "See that he receives money and 
suitable clothing," he commanded. 
Takuan bowed. "Let me thank you for your kindness to the boy." 
"Takuan!" Ikeda laughed. "This is the first time you've ever thanked me twice for 
anything!" 
"I suppose that's true." Takuan grinned. "It won't happen again." 
"It's all right for him to roam about while he's still young," said Terumasa. 
"But now that he's going out on his own—reborn, as you put it—he should have 
a new name. Let it be Miyamoto, so that he never forgets his birthplace. From 
now on, Takezo, call yourself Miyamoto." 
Takezo's hands went automatically to the floor. Palms down, he bowed 
deep and long. "Yes, sir, I will do that." 
"You should change your first name too," Takuan interjected. "Why not 
read the Chinese characters of your name as 'Musashi' instead of 'Takezo'? You 
can keep writing your name the same as before. It's only fitting that everything 
should begin anew on this day of your rebirth." 
Terumasa, who was by this time in a very good mood, nodded his approval 
enthusiastically. "Miyamoto Musashi! It's a good name, a very good name. We 
should drink to it." 
They moved into another room, sake was served, and Takezo and Takuan 
kept his lordship company far into the night. They were joined by several of 
Terumasa's retainers, and eventually Takuan got to his feet and performed an 
ancient dance. He was expert, his vivid movements creating an imaginary world 
of delight. Takezo, now Musashi, watched with admiration, respect and 
enjoyment as the drinking went on and on. 
The following day they both left the castle. Musashi was taking his first 
steps into a new life, a life of discipline and training in the martial arts. During 
his three-year incarceration, he had resolved to master the Art of War. 
Takuan had his own plans. He had decided to travel about the countryside, 
and the time had come, he said, to part again. 

Pagina 141 di 1295

When they reached the town outside the castle walls, Musashi made as if 
to take his leave, but the monk grabbed his sleeve and said, "Isn't there someone 
you'd like to see?" 
"Who?" 
"Ogin?" 
"Is she still alive?" he asked in bewilderment. Even in his sleep, he'd never 
forgotten the gentle sister who'd been a mother to him so long. 
Takuan told him that when he'd attacked the stockade at Hinagura three 
years earlier, Ogin had indeed already been taken away. Although no charges 
were pressed against her, she had been reluctant to return home and so went 
instead to stay with a relative in a village in the Sayo district. She was now 
living comfortably there. 
"Wouldn't you like to see her?" asked Takuan. "She's very eager to see 
you. I told her three years ago that she should consider you dead, since in one 
sense, you were. I also told her, however, that after three years I'd bring her a 
new brother, different from the old Takezo." 
Musashi pressed his palms together and raised them in front of his head, as 
he would have done in prayer before a statue of the Buddha. "Not only have you 
taken care of me," he said with deep emotion, "but you've seen to Ogin's well¬ 
being too. Takuan, you are truly a compassionate man. I don't think I'll ever be 
able to thank you for what you've done." 
"One way to thank me would be to let me take you to your sister." 
"No . . . No, I don't think I should go. Hearing about her from you has been 
as good as meeting her." 
"Surely you want to see her yourself, if only for a few minutes." 
"No, I don't think so. I did die, Takuan, and I do feel reborn. I don't think 
that now is the time to return to the past. What I have to do is take a resolute step 
forward, into the future. I've barely found the way along which I'll have to travel. 
When I've made some progress toward the knowledge and self-perfection I'm 
seeking, perhaps I'll take the time to relax and look back. Not now." 
"I see." 
"I find it hard to put into words, but I hope you'll understand anyway." 

Pagina 142 di 1295

"I do. I'm glad to see you're as serious about your goal as you are. Keep 
following your own judgment." 
"I'll say good-bye now, but someday, if I don't get myself killed along the 
way, we'll meet again." 
"Yes, yes. If we have a chance to meet, let's by all means do so." Takuan 
turned, took a step, and then halted. "Oh, yes. I suppose I should warn you that 
Osugi and Uncle Gon left Miyamoto in search of you and Otsu three years ago. 
They resolved never to return until they've taken their revenge, and old as they 
are, they're still trying to track you down. They may cause you some 
inconvenience, but I don't think they can make any real trouble. Don't take them 
too seriously. 
"Oh, yes, and then there's Aoki Tanzaemon. I don't suppose you ever knew 
his name, but he was in charge of the search for you. Perhaps it had nothing to 
do with anything you or I said or did, but that splendid samurai managed to 
disgrace himself, with the result that he's been dismissed permanently from Lord 
Ikeda's service. He's no doubt wandering about too." Takuan grew grave. 
"Musashi, your path won't be an easy one. Be careful as you make your way 
along it." 
"I'll do my best." Musashi smiled. 
"Well, I guess that's everything. I'll be on my way." Takuan turned and 
walked westward. He didn't look back. 
"Keep well," Musashi called after him. He stood at the crossroads 
watching the monk's form recede until it was out of sight. Then, once again 
alone, he started to walk toward the east. 
"Now there's only this sword," he thought. "The only thing in the world I 
have to rely on." He rested his hand on the weapon's handle and vowed to 
himself, "I will live by its rule. I will regard it as my soul, and by learning to 
master it, strive to improve myself, to become a better and wiser human being. 
Takuan follows the Way of Zen, I will follow the Way of the Sword. I must make 
of myself an even better man than he is." 
After all, he reflected, he was still young. It was not too late. 
His footsteps were steady and strong, his eyes full of youth and hope. 
From time to time he raised the brim of his basket hat, and stared down the long 
road into the future, the unknown path all humans must tread. 

Pagina 143 di 1295

He hadn't gone far—in fact, he was just on the outskirts of Himeji—when 
a woman came running toward him from the other side of Hanada Bridge. He 
squinted into the sunlight. 
"It's you!" Otsu cried, clutching his sleeve. 
Musashi gasped in surprise. 
Otsu's tone was reproachful. "Takezo, surely you haven't forgotten? Don't 
you remember the name of this bridge? Did it slip your mind that I promised to 
wait here for you, no matter how long it took?" 
"You've been waiting here for the last three years?" He was astounded. 
"Yes. Osugi and Uncle Gon caught up with me right after I left you. I was 
sick and had to take a rest. And I almost got myself killed. But I got away. I've 
been waiting here since about twenty days after we said good-bye at Nakayama 
Pass." 
Pointing to a basket-weaving shop at the end of the bridge, a typical little 
highroad stall selling souvenirs to travelers, she continued: "I told the people 
there my story, and they were kind enough to take me on as a sort of helper. So I 
could stay and wait for you. Today is the nine hundred and seventieth day, and 
I've kept my promise faithfully." She peered into his face, trying to fathom his 
thoughts. "You will take me with you, won't you?" 
The truth, of course, was that Musashi had no intention of taking her or 
anyone else with him. At this very moment, he was hurrying away to avoid 
thinking about his sister, whom he wanted to see so badly and felt so strongly 
drawn toward. 
The questions raced through his agitated mind: "What can I do? How can I 
embark on my quest for truth and knowledge with a woman, with anyone, 
interfering all the time? And this particular girl is, after all, still betrothed to 
Matahachi." Musashi couldn't keep his thoughts from showing on his face. 
"Take you with me? Take you where?" he demanded bluntly. 
"Wherever you go." 
"I'm setting out on a long, hard journey, not a sightseeing trip!" 
"I won't get in your way. And I'm prepared to endure some hardships." 
"Some? Only some?" 

Pagina 144 di 1295

"As many as I have to." 
"That's not the point. Otsu, how can a man master the Way of the Samurai 
with a woman tagging along? Wouldn't that be funny. People'd say, 'Look at 
Musashi, he needs a wet nurse to take care of him.'" She pulled harder at his 
kimono, clinging like a child. "Let go of my sleeve," he ordered. 
"No, I won't! You lied to me, didn't you?" 
"When did I lie to you?" 
"At the pass. You promised to take me with you." 
"That was ages ago. I wasn't really thinking then either, and I didn't have 
time to explain. What's more, it wasn't my idea, it was yours. I was in a hurry to 
get moving, and you wouldn't let me go until I promised. I went along with what 
you said because I had no choice." 
"No, no, no! You can't mean what you're saying, you can't," she cried, 
pinning him against the bridge railing. 
"Let go of me! People are watching." 
"Let them! When you were tied up in the tree, I asked you if you wanted 
my help. You were so happy you told me twice to cut the rope. You don't deny 
that, do you?" 
She was trying to be logical in her argument, but her tears betrayed her. 
First abandoned as an infant, then jilted by her betrothed and now this. Musashi, 
knowing how alone she was in the world and caring for her deeply, was tongue- 
tied, though outwardly more composed. 
"Let go!" he said with finality. "It's broad daylight and people are staring at 
us. Do you want us to be a sideshow for these busybodies?" 
She released his sleeve and fell sobbing against the railing, her shiny hair 
falling over her face. 
"I'm sorry," she mumbled. "I shouldn't have said all that. Please forget it. 
You don't owe me anything." 
Leaning over and pushing her hair from her face with both hands, he 
looked into her eyes. "Otsu," he said tenderly. "During all that time you were 
waiting, until this very day, I've been shut up in the castle donjon. For three years 
I haven't even seen the sun." 
"Yes, I heard." 

Pagina 145 di 1295

"You knew?" 
"Takuan told me." 
"Takuan? He told you everything?" 
"I guess so. I fainted at the bottom of a ravine near the Mikazuki Teahouse. 
I was running away from Osugi and Uncle Gon. Takuan rescued me. He also 
helped me make arrangements to work here, at the souvenir shop. That was three 
years ago. And he's stopped in several times. Only yesterday, he came and had 
some tea. I wasn't sure what he meant, but he said, 'It's got to do with a man and 
a woman, so who can say how it'll turn out?" 
Musashi dropped his hands and looked down the road leading west. He 
wondered if he'd ever again meet the man who'd saved his life. And again he 
was struck by Takuan's concern for his fellow man, which seemed all- 
encompassing and completely devoid of selfishness. Musashi realized how 
narrow-minded he himself had been, how petty, to suppose that the monk felt a 
special compassion for him alone; his generosity encompassed Ogin, Otsu, 
anyone in need whom he thought he could help. 
"It has to do with a man and a woman. ..." Takuan's words to Otsu sat 
heavily on Musashi's mind. It was a burden for which he was ill prepared, since 
in all the mountains of books he'd pored over those three years, there wasn't one 
word about the situation he was in now. Even Takuan had shrunk from becoming 
involved in this matter between him and Otsu. Had Takuan meant that 
relationships between men and women had to be worked out alone by the people 
involved? Did he mean that no rules applied, as they did in the Art of War? That 
there was no foolproof strategy, no way to win? Or was this meant as a test for 
Musashi, a problem only Musashi would be able to solve for himself? 
Lost in thought, he stared down at the water flowing under the bridge. 
Otsu gazed up into his face, now distant and calm. "I can come, can't I?" 
she pleaded. "The shopkeeper's promised to let me quit whenever I wish. I'll just 
go and explain everything and then pack my things. I'll be back in a minute." 
Musashi covered her small white hand, which was resting on the railing, 
with his own. "Listen," he said plaintively. "I beg of you, just stop and think." 
"What's there to think about?" 
"I told you. I've just become a new man. I stayed in that musty hole for 
three years. I read books. I thought. I screamed and cried. Then suddenly the 

Pagina 146 di 1295

light dawned. I understood what it means to be human. I have a new name, 
Miyamoto Musashi. I want to dedicate myself to training and discipline. I want 
to spend every moment of every day working to improve myself. I know now 
how far I have to go. If you chose to bind your life to mine, you'd never be 
happy. There will be nothing but hardship, and it won't get easier as it goes 
along. It'll get more and more difficult." 
"When you talk like that, I feel closer to you than ever. Now I'm convinced 
I was right. I've found the best man I could ever find, even if I searched for the 
rest of my life." 
He saw he was just making things worse. "I'm sorry, I can't take you with 
me." 
"Well, then, I'll just follow along. As long as I don't interfere with your 
training, what harm would it do? You won't even know I'm around." Musashi 
could find no answer. 
"I won't bother you. I promise." 
He remained silent. 
"It's all right then, isn't it? Just wait here; I'll be back in a second. And I'll 
be furious if you try to sneak away." Otsu ran off toward the basket-weaving 
shop. 
Musashi thought of ignoring everything and running too, in the opposite 
direction. Though the will was there, his feet wouldn't move. 
Otsu looked back and called, "Remember, don't try to sneak off!" She 
smiled, showing her dimples, and Musashi inadvertently nodded. Satisfied by 
this gesture, she disappeared into the shop. 
If he was going to escape, this was the time. His heart told him so, but his 
body was still shackled by Otsu's pretty dimples and pleading eyes. How sweet 
she was! It was certain no one in the world save his sister loved him so much. 
And it wasn't as though he disliked her. 
He looked at the sky, he looked into the water, desperately gripped the 
railing, troubled and confused. Soon tiny bits of wood began floating from the 
bridge into the flowing stream. 
Otsu reappeared on the bridge in new straw sandals, light yellow leggings 
and a large traveling hat tied under the chin with a crimson ribbon. She'd never 
looked more beautiful. 

Pagina 147 di 1295

But Musashi was nowhere to be seen. 
With a cry of shock, she burst into tears. Then her eyes fell upon the spot 
on the railing from which the chips of wood had fallen. There, carved with the 
point of a dagger, was the clearly inscribed message. "Forgive me. Forgive me."
