The Port


        "Gonnosuke! ... Gonnosuke! ... Gonnosuke!"
        Iori couldn't seem to stop himself. He called the name over and over and
over. Having found some of Gonnosuke's belongings lying on the ground, he
was convinced the man was dead.
        A day and a night had passed. He'd been in a walking daze, oblivious of
his weariness. His legs, hands and head were spattered with blood, his kimono
badly torn.
        Seized by a spasm, he would look up at the sky and cry, "I'm ready." Or
stare at the ground and curse.
        "Have I gone crazy?" he thought, suddenly feeling cold. Looking into a
puddle of water, he recognized his own face and felt relieved. But he was alone,
with no one to turn to, only half believing he was still alive. When he'd awoken
at the bottom of the ravine, he couldn't remember where he'd been the past
several days. It didn't occur to him to try to go back to the Kongōji or Koyagyū.
        An object glinting with the colors of the rainbow caught his eye—a
pheasant. He became aware of the fragrance of wild wisteria in the air and sat
down. As he tried to make sense of his situation, thoughts of the sun captured his
mind. He imagined it as being everywhere—beyond the clouds, among the
peaks, in the valleys. He shifted to a kneeling position, clasped his hands, shut
his eyes and began praying. When he opened his eyes a few minutes later, the
first thing he saw was a glimpse of ocean, blue and misty, between two
mountains.
       "Little boy," said a motherly voice. "Are you all right?"
       "Hunh?" With a start, Iori turned his hollow eyes toward the two women
       who were staring at him curiously.
       "What do you suppose is wrong with him, Mother?" asked the younger
       woman, regarding Iori with distaste.
        Looking puzzled, the older woman walked over to Iori, and seeing the
blood on his clothes, she frowned. "Don't those cuts hurt?" she asked. Iori shook
his head. She turned to her daughter and said, "He seems to understand what I
say."
        They asked his name, where he had come from, where he had been born,

what he was doing here, and whom he had been praying to. Little by little, as he
searched around for the answers, his memory came back.
       More sympathetic now, the daughter, whose name was Otsuru, said, "Let's
take him back to Sakai with us. Maybe he'd be useful in the shop. He's just the
right age."
     "That might be a good idea," said her mother, Osei. "Will he come?" "He'll
     come.... Won't you?"
     Iori nodded and said, "Uh-huh."
     "Come along then, but you'll have to carry our luggage."
     "Uh."
       Iori acknowledged their remarks with a grunt but otherwise said nothing
on the journey down the mountain, along a country road and into Kishiwada. But
among people again, he became talkative.
     "Where do you live?" he asked.
     "In Sakai."
     "Is that near here?"
     "No, it's near Osaka."
     "Where's Osaka?"
     "We'll take a ship from here and go to Sakai. Then you'll know."
       "Really! A ship?" Excited by the prospect, he rattled on for several
minutes, telling them how he'd ridden any number of ferryboats on the way from
Edo to Yamato, but though the ocean wasn't far from his birthplace in Shimōsa,
he'd never been out to sea in a ship.
       "That'll make you happy, then, won't it?" said Otsuru. "But you mustn't call
my mother 'Auntie.' Say 'Madam' when you speak to her."
     "Uh."
     "And you mustn't answer 'Uh.' Say 'Yes, ma'am."'
     "Yes, ma'am."
     "That's better. Now, if you stay with us and work hard, I'll see you're made a
     shop assistant."
     "What does your family do?"
     "My father's a shipping broker."
     "What's that?"
     "He's a merchant. He owns a lot of ships, and they sail all over western
     Japan."
     "Oh, just a merchant?" sniffed Iori.
       "'Just a merchant'! Why—!" exclaimed the girl. The mother was inclined

to overlook Iori's bluntness, but the daughter was indignant. Then she hesitated,
saying, "I suppose he's never seen merchants other than candy sellers or clothing
salesmen." The fierce pride of the Kansai merchants took over, and she informed
him that her father had three warehouses, large ones, in Sakai and several tens of
vessels. She gave him to understand that there were branch offices in
Shimonoseki, Marukame and Shikama, and that the services performed for the
House of Hosokawa in Kokura were of such great importance that her father's
ships had the status of official vessels.
       "And," she went on, "he's allowed to have a surname and carry two
swords, like a samurai. Everyone in western Honshu and Kyushu knows the
name of Kobayashi Tarōzaemon of Shimonoseki. In time of war, daimyō like
Shimazu and Hosokawa never have enough ships, so my father is just as
important as a general."
      "I didn't mean to make you angry," said Iori.
      The two women laughed.
      "We're not angry," said Otsuru. "But a boy like you, what do you know of
      the world?"
      "I'm sorry."
       Turning a corner, they were greeted by the tang of salt air. Otsuru pointed
to a ship tied up at Kishiwada Pier. It had a capacity of five hundred bushels and
was loaded with local produce.
       "That's the ship we'll go home in," she said proudly.
       The ship captain and a couple of Kobayashi agents came out of a dockside
teahouse to meet them.
       "Did you have a nice walk?" asked the captain. "I'm sorry to say we're very
heavily loaded, so I couldn't keep much space open for you. Shall we go on
board?"
       He led the way to the stern of the ship, where a space had been partitioned
off with curtains. A red rug had been spread, and elegant Momoyama-style
lacquered utensils contained an abundance of food and sake. Iori had the feeling
he was entering a small, well-appointed room in a daimyō's mansion.
       The ship reached Sakai in the evening, after an uneventful voyage up
Osaka Bay. The travelers went directly to the Kobayashi establishment, facing
the wharf, where they were welcomed by the manager, a man named Sahei, and
a large group of assistants who had gathered at the spacious entrance.
       As Osei was going into the house, she turned and said, "Sahei, will you
look after the child, please?"

       "You mean the dirty little urchin who came off the ship?"
       "Yes. He seems quick-witted, so you should be able to put him to work... .
And do something about his clothes. He may have lice. See that he washes well
and give him a new kimono. Then he can go to bed."
       Iori didn't see the mistress of the house or her daughter for the next few
days. There was a half-length curtain separating the office from the living
quarters in the back. It was like a wall. Without special permission, not even
Sahei dared go beyond it.
       Iori was given a corner of the "shop," as the office was called, in which to
sleep, and though he was grateful for being rescued, he soon became dissatisfied
with his new way of life.
       The cosmopolitan atmosphere into which he'd been dropped had a certain
fascination. He gaped at the foreign innovations he saw on the streets, at the
ships in the harbor and the signs of prosperity evident in the way people lived.
But it was always, "Hey, boy! Do this! ... Do that!" From the lowest assistant to
the manager, they made him chase around like a dog, not at all like their attitude
when speaking to a member of the household or a customer. Then they turned
into fawning sycophants. And from morning to night, they talked of money,
money. If it was not that, it was work, work.
       "And they call themselves human beings!" thought Iori. He longed for the
blue sky and the smell of warm grass under the sun and decided any number of
times to run away. The yearning was strongest when he remembered Musashi
talking about ways of nourishing the spirit. He visualized how Musashi had
looked, and the face of the departed Gonnosuke. And Otsū.
       Matters came to a head one day when Sahei called, "Io! Io, where are
you?" Getting no answer, he stood up and walked to the black-lacquered keyaki
beam forming the threshold of the office. "You there, the new boy," he shouted.
"Why don't you come when you're called?"
       Iori was sweeping the walk between the office and the storehouse. He
looked up and asked, "Were you calling me?"
       "Were you calling me, sir!"
       "I see."
       "I see, sir!"
      "Yes, sir."
      "Don't you have ears? Why didn't you answer me?"
      "I heard you say 'Io.' That couldn't be me. My name's Iori ... sir."
      "Io's enough. And another thing. I told you the other day to stop wearing

     that sword."
     "Yes, sir."
     "Give it to me."
     Iori hesitated a moment, then said, "It's a keepsake from my father. I
     couldn't let go of it."
     "Impudent brat! Give it to me."
     "I don't want to be a merchant anyway."
      "If it weren't for merchants, people couldn't live," Sahei said forcefully.
"Who'd bring in goods from foreign countries? Nobunaga and Hideyoshi are
great men, but they couldn't have built all those castles—Azuchi, Jurakudai,
Fushimi—without the help of merchants. Just look at the men here in Sakai—
Namban, Ruzon, Fukien, Amoi. They're all carrying on trade on a large scale."
      "I know that."
      "How would you know?"
      "Anybody can see the big weaving houses at Ayamachi, Kinumachi and
Nishikimachi, and up on the hill Ruzon'ya's establishment looks like a castle.
There are rows and rows of warehouses and mansions belonging to rich
merchants. This place—well, I know madam and Otsuru are proud of it, but it
doesn't amount to anything by comparison."
      "Why, you little son of a bitch!"
      Sahei was barely out the door before Iori had dropped his broom and fled.
Sahei summoned some dock workers and ordered them to catch him.
      When Iori was dragged back, Sahei was fuming. "What can you do with a
boy like that? He talks back and makes fun of all of us. Punish him good today."
Going back into the office, he added, "Take that sword away from him."
      They removed the offending weapon and tied Iori's hands behind him.
When they fastened the rope to a large crate of cargo, Iori looked like a monkey
on a leash.
      "Stay there awhile," said one of the men, smirking. "Let people make fun
of you." The others guffawed and went back to their work.
      There was nothing Iori hated more than this. How often Musashi and
Gonnosuke had admonished him not to do things he might be ashamed of.
      First he tried pleading, then promised to mend his ways. When this proved
ineffective, he switched to invective.
      "The manager's a fool—crazy old fart! Let me loose and give me back my
sword! I won't stay in a house like this."
      Sahei came out and shouted, "Quiet!" He then tried to gag Iori, but the boy

bit his finger, so he gave up and had the dock workers do it.
       Iori tugged at his bonds, pulling this way and that. Already under a terrible
strain from being exposed to public view, he burst into tears when a horse
urinated and the foamy liquid trickled toward his feet.
       As he was quieting down, he saw something that almost made him faint.
On the other side of a horse was a young woman, her head protected from the
sweltering sun by a broad-brimmed lacquered hat. Her hemp kimono was tied up
for traveling, and she carried a thin bamboo pole.
       In vain, he tried to cry out her name. Stretching his neck out, he almost
choked with the effort. His eyes were dry, but his shoulders shook with his
sobbing. It was maddening, Otsū was so near. Where was she going? Why had
she left Edo?
       Later in the day, when a ship tied up at the pier, the neighborhood became
even busier.
       "Sahei, what's this boy doing out here, looking like a trained bear on
exhibit? It's cruel to leave him like that. It's also bad for business." The man
calling into the office was a cousin of Tarōzaemon. He was usually called
Namban'ya, the name of the shop where he worked. Black pockmarks added a
certain sinisterness to the anger in his face. Despite his appearance, he was a
friendly man and often gave sweets to Iori. "I don't care if you are punishing
him," he continued. "It's not right to do it out on the street. It's bad for the
Kobayashi name. Untie him."
       "Yes, sir." Sahei complied immediately, all the while regaling Namban'ya
with a detailed account of how useless Iori was.
       "If you don't know what to do with him," said Namban'ya, "I'll take him
home with me. I'll speak to Osei about it today."
       The manager, fearing the consequences when the mistress of the house
heard what had happened, suddenly had an urge to soothe Iori's feelings. Iori, for
his part, wouldn't have anything to do with the man for the rest of the day.
       On his way out that evening, Namban'ya stopped in Iori's corner of the
shop. A little drunk but in high spirits, he said, "Well, you won't be going with
me after all. The women wouldn't hear of it. Ha!"
       His conversation with Osei and Otsuru did have one salutary effect,
however. The very next day Iori entered a temple school in the neighborhood.
He was allowed to wear his sword to school, and neither Sahei nor the others
gave him further trouble.
       But still he was unable to settle down. When he was inside, his eyes often

strayed to the street. Every time a young woman even remotely like Otsū passed,
his color changed. Sometimes he ran out for a closer look.
       One morning toward the beginning of the ninth month, a prodigious
quantity of luggage began arriving by riverboat from Kyoto. By midday, chests
and baskets were piled high in front of the office. Tags identified the property as
that of samurai in the House of Hosokawa. They had been in Kyoto on business
similar to that which had brought Sado to Mount Kōya, looking after the
posthumous affairs of Hosokawa Yūsai. Now they sat drinking barley tea and
fanning themselves, some in the office, some under the eaves outside.
       Coming back from school, Iori got as far as the street. He stopped and
turned pale.
       Kojirō, seated atop a large basket, was saying to Sahei, "It's too hot out
here. Hasn't our ship docked yet?"
       Sahei looked up from the manifest in his hands and pointed toward the
pier. "Your ship is the Tatsumimaru. It's right over there. As you can see, they
haven't finished loading, so your places on board aren't ready yet. I'm sorry."
       "I'd much prefer to wait on board. It should be a little cooler there."
       "Yes, sir. I'll go and see how things are coming along." Too rushed to wipe
the sweat from his forehead, he scurried out to the street, where he caught sight
of Iori.
       "What're you doing there, looking as though you'd swallowed a ramrod?
Go and wait on the passengers. Barley tea, cold water, hot water—give them
whatever they want."
       Iori went to a shed at the entrance of the alley by the storehouse, where a
kettle of water was kept boiling. But instead of going about his business, he
stood glaring at Kojirō.
       He was usually called Ganryū now, the rather scholarly-sounding name
seeming more appropriate to his present age and status. He was heavier and
more solid. His face had filled out; his once piercing eyes were serene and
untroubled. He no longer made frequent use of his rapier tongue, which in the
past had caused so much injury. Somehow the dignity of his sword had become a
part of his personality.
       One result was that he had gradually been accepted by his fellow samurai.
They not only spoke highly of him but actually respected him.
       Pouring sweat, Sahei returned from the ship, apologized again for the long
wait and announced, "The seats amidship are still not ready, but those in the
prow are." This meant the foot soldiers and younger samurai could go on board.

They proceeded to gather up their belongings and left in a group. There
remained only Kojirō and six or seven older men, all officials of some
importance in the fief.
      "Sado hasn't come yet, has he?" said Kojirō.
      "No, but he should be here before long."
      "We'll be getting the sun from the west soon," Sahei said to Kojirō. "It'll be
      cooler if you move inside."
      "The flies are terrible," complained Kojirō. "And I'm thirsty. Could I have
      another cup of tea?"
       "Right away, sir." Without getting up, Sahei shouted toward the hot-water
shed. "Io, what are you doing? Bring some tea for our guests." He busily
addressed himself to his manifest again, but realizing Iori had not answered, he
started to repeat his order. Then he saw the boy approaching slowly with several
cups of tea on a tray.
      Iori offered tea to each of the samurai, bowing politely each time. Standing
      before Kojirō with the last two cups, he said, "Please have some tea."
      Kojirō absentmindedly extended his hand but abruptly withdrew it as his
      eyes met Iori's. Startled, he exclaimed, "Why, it's—"
      Breaking into a grin, Iori said, "The last time I had the bad luck to run into
      you was in Musashino."
      "What's that?" rasped Kojirō, in a tone hardly appropriate to his present
      status.
      He was about to say something else when Iori shouted, "Oh, you remember
      me?" and slung the tray at his face.
       "Oh!" cried Kojirō, grabbing Iori by the wrist. Though the tray missed
him, a bit of hot tea caught him in the left eye. The rest of the tea spilled onto his
chest and lap. The tray crashed into a corner post.
       "You little bastard!" shouted Kojirō. He threw Iori onto the dirt floor and
planted one foot on top of him. "Manager," he called angrily. "This brat is one of
your boys, isn't he? Come here and hold him down. Even if he is only a child, I
won't stand for this."
       Frightened out of his wits, Sahei rushed to do as he was told. But somehow
Iori managed to draw his sword and take a swing at Kojirō's arm. Kojirō kicked
him to the middle of the room and jumped back a pace.
       Sahei turned and rushed back, screaming his lungs out. He reached Iori
just as the boy jumped to his feet.
       "You keep out of this!" Iori cried, then, looking Kojirō straight in the face,

he spat out, "Serves you right!" and ran outside.
       Kojirō picked up a carrying pole that happened to be handy and threw it at
       the boy, scoring a perfect hit behind his knee. Iori landed flat on his face.
       At Sahei's command, several men fell on Iori and hauled him back to the
        hot-water shed, where a servant was wiping off Kojirō's kimono and
hakama. "Please forgive this outrage," pleaded Sahei.
        "We don't know how to apologize," said one of the assistants.
        Without looking at them, Kojirō took a damp towel from the servant and
wiped off his face.
        Iori had been forced to the ground, his arms bent tightly behind him. "Let
me go," he begged, his body writhing in pain. "I won't run away. I'm a samurai's
son. I did it on purpose and I'll take my punishment like a man."
        Kojirō finished straightening his clothing and smoothed his hair. "Let him
go," he said quietly.
        Not knowing what to make of the placid expression on the samurai's face,
Sahei stammered, "Are ... are you sure it's all right?"
        "Yes. But"—the word sounded like a nail being driven into a board
—"although I have no intention of becoming involved with a mere child, if you
feel he should be punished, I can suggest a method. Pour a dipperful of boiling
water over his head. It won't kill him."
       "Boiling water!" Sahei recoiled at the suggestion.
       "Yes. If you want to let him go, that's all right too."
       Sahei and his men looked at each other uncertainly.
       "We can't let something like that go unpunished."
       "He's always up to no good."
       "He's lucky he didn't get killed."
       "Bring a rope."
        When they started to tie him, Iori fought off their hands. "What are you
doing?" he screamed. Sitting on the ground, he said, "I told you I wouldn't run
away, didn't I? I'll take my punishment. I had a reason for doing what I did. A
merchant might apologize. Not me. The son of a samurai is not going to cry over
a little hot water."
        "All right," said Sahei. "You asked for it." He rolled up his sleeve, filled a
dipper with boiling water and walked slowly toward Iori.
        "Shut your eyes, Iori. If you don't, you'll go blind." The voice came from
across the street.
        Not daring to look to see whose voice it was, Iori shut his eyes. He

recalled a story Musashi had told him once in Musashino. It was about Kaisen, a
Zen priest highly revered by the warriors of Kai Province. When Nobunaga and
Ieyasu attacked Kaisen's temple and put it to the torch, the priest seated himself
calmly in the upper floor of the gate and, while burning to death, uttered the
words: "If your heart is obliterated through enlightenment, the fire is cool."
       "It's only a little dipper of hot water," Iori told himself. "I mustn't think that
way." He tried desperately to become a selfless void, free of delusion, without
sorrows. Perhaps, if he had been younger, or much older ... but at his age, he was
too much a part of the world he lived in.
       When was it coming? For a giddy moment, he thought the sweat dripping
from his forehead was boiling water. A minute seemed like a hundred years.
"Why, it's Sado," said Kojirō.
     Sahei and all the others turned and stared at the old samurai.
     "What's going on here?" Sado asked, coming across the street with
     Nuinosuke at his side.
     Kojirō laughed and said lightly, "You caught us at an odd moment. They're
     punishing the boy."
       Sado looked intently at Iori. "Punishing him? Well, if he's done something
bad, he should be punished. Go right ahead. I'll watch."
       Sahei glanced out of the corner of his eye at Kojirō, who sized the
situation up immediately and knew he was the one who would be held
responsible for the severity of the punishment. "That's enough," he said.
       Iori opened his eyes. He had a little trouble focusing them, but when he
recognized Sado, he said happily, "I know you. You're the samurai who came to
the Tokuganji in Hōtengahara."
     "You remember me?"
     "Yes, sir."
     "What's happened to your teacher, Musashi?"
     Iori sniffled and put his hands to his eyes.
       Sado's knowing the boy came as a shock to Kojirō. Thinking about it for a
moment, he decided it must have something to do with Sado's search for
Musashi. But he certainly didn't want Musashi's name to come up in a
conversation between himself and the senior retainer. He knew that one of these
days he would have to fight Musashi, but it was no longer a strictly private
matter.
       In fact, a split had developed in both the main line and the branches of the
House of Hosokawa, one faction thinking highly of Musashi, the other partial to

the former rōnin who was now the clan's chief sword instructor. Some said the
real reason the fight was inevitable was behind-the-scenes rivalry between Sado
and Kakubei.
       To Kojirō's relief, the boatswain of the Tatsumimaru arrived just then with
word that the ship was ready.
      Sado, remaining behind, said, "The ship doesn't leave till sundown, does
      it?"
      "That's right," replied Sahei, who was pacing about the office worrying
      about the consequences of today's affair.
      "I have time for a little rest, then?"
      "Plenty of time. Please, have some tea."
       Otsuru appeared at the inner door and beckoned to the manager. After
listening to her for a couple of minutes, Sahei came back to Sado and said, "The
office is not really the place to receive you. It's only a step through the garden to
the house. Would you mind going there?"
      "That's very kind," replied Sado. "To whom am I indebted? The lady of the
      house?"
      "Yes. She said she'd like to thank you."
      "What for?"
      Sahei scratched his head. "I, eh, I imagine for seeing that Iori came to no
      harm. Since the master isn't here ..."
      "Speaking of Iori, I'd like to talk to him. Would you call him?"
       The garden was what Sado would have expected in the house of a rich
Sakai merchant. Though bounded on one side by a storehouse, it was a world
apart from the hot, noisy office. Rocks and plants were all freshly watered and
there was a running brook.
       Osei and Otsuru were kneeling in a small, elegant room facing the garden.
There was a wool rug on top of the tatami and trays of cakes and tobacco. Sado
noticed the spicy fragrance of mixed incense.
       Sitting down at the edge of the room, he said, "I won't come in. My feet
are dirty."
       While serving him tea, Osei apologized for her employees and thanked
him for saving Iori.
       Sado said, "I had occasion some time ago to meet that boy. I'm happy to
have found him again. How does it happen he's staying in your house?"
       After hearing her explanation, Sado told her about his long search for
Musashi. They chatted amiably for a while, then Sado said, "I was watching Iori

from across the street for several minutes. I admired his ability to remain calm.
He conducted himself very well. As a matter of fact, I think it's a mistake to raise
a boy with that much spirit in a merchant's establishment. I wonder if you
wouldn't consent to turning him over to me. In Kokura, he could be brought up
as a samurai."
      Osei agreed readily, saying, "It would be the best thing that could possibly
      happen to him."
      Otsuru got up to go look for Iori, but just then he emerged from behind a
      tree, where he had overheard the whole conversation.
      "Do you object to going with me?" asked Sado.
      Bursting with happiness, Iori begged to be taken to Kokura.
       While Sado drank his tea, Otsuru got Iori ready for the trip: kimono,
hakama, leggings, basket hat—all new. It was the first time he had ever worn a
hakama.
       That evening, as the Tatsumimaru spread its black wings and sailed forth
under clouds turned golden by the setting sun, Iori looked back at a sea of faces
—Otsuru's, her mother's, Sahei's, those of a large group of well-wishers, the face
of the city of Sakai.
       With a broad smile on his face, he took off his basket hat and waved at
them.
