The Mercy of Kannon


       Otsū sat listening to the water dripping from a leak in the roof. Driven by
the wind, the rain whipped in under the eaves and splashed against the shutters.
But it was autumn, and there was no way of telling: morning might dawn bright
and clear.
       Then Osugi came into her thoughts. "I wonder if she's out in this storm, all
wet and cold. She's old. She might not last till morning. Even if she does, it
could be days before she's found. She could die of starvation."
       "Jōtarō," she called softly. "Wake up." She was afraid he'd done something
cruel, since she'd heard him tell the old woman's henchmen he was punishing her
and had casually made a similar remark on the way to the inn.
       "She's not really bad at heart." she thought. "If I'm honest with her, one of
these days she'll understand me.... I must go to her."
       Thinking: "If Jōtarō gets angry, it can't be helped," she opened a shutter.
Against the blackness of the sky, the rain showed whitely. After tucking up her
skirts, she took from the wall a basket hat made out of bamboo bark and tied it
on her head. Then she threw a bulky straw rain cape around her shoulders, put
on a pair of straw sandals and dashed through the sheet of rain pouring off the
roof.
       On approaching the shrine where Mambei had taken her, she saw that the
stone steps leading up to it had become a many-tiered waterfall. At the top, the
wind was much stronger, howling through the cryptomerias like a pack of angry
dogs.
       "Where can she be?" she thought, as she peered into the shrine. She called
into the dark space underneath it, but no answer came.
       She went around to the back of the building and stood there for a few
minutes. The wailing wind swept over her like breakers on a raging sea.
Gradually she became aware of another sound, almost indistinguishable from the
storm. It stopped and started again.
       "Oh-h-h. Hear me, somebody.... Isn't somebody out there? ... Oh-h-h."
"Granny!" shouted Otsū. "Granny, where are you?" Since she was literally
crying into the wind, the sound did not carry far.
       But somehow the feeling communicated itself. "Oh! There's someone

there. I know it.... Save me. Here! Save me!"
       In the snatches of sound that reached her ears, Otsū heard the cry of
desperation.
       "Where are you?" she screamed hoarsely. "Granny, where are you?" She
ran all the way around the shrine, stopped a moment, then ran around it again.
Almost by accident, she noticed what looked like a bear's cave, about twenty
paces away, near the bottom of the steep path leading up to the inner shrine.
       As she drew closer, she knew for certain the old woman's voice was
coming from within. Arriving at the entrance, she stopped and stared at the large
rocks blocking it.
       "Who is it? Who's there? Are you a manifestation of Kannon? I worship
her every day. Have pity on me. Save a poor old woman who's been trapped by a
fiend." Osugi's pleas took on a hysterical tone. Half crying, half begging, in the
dark interval between life and death, she formed a vision of the compassionate
Kannon and hurled toward it her fervent prayer for continued life.
       "How happy I am!" she cried deliriously. "Kannon the all-merciful has
seen the goodness of my heart and taken pity on me. She's come to rescue me!
Great compassion! Great mercy! Hail to the Bodhisattva Kannon, hail to the
Bodhisattva Kannon, hail to—"
       Her voice broke off abruptly. Perhaps she was thinking that was sufficient,
for it was only natural that in her extremity Kannon would come in some form or
other to her aid. She was the head of a fine family, a good mother, and believed
herself to be an upright and flawless human being. And whatever she did was, of
course, morally just.
       But then, sensing that whoever was outside the cave was not an apparition
but a real, living person, she relaxed, and when she relaxed, she passed out.
       Not knowing what the sudden cessation of Osugi's cries meant, Otsū was
beside herself. Somehow, the opening to the cave had to be cleared. As she
doubled her efforts, the band holding her basket hat came loose, and the hat and
her black tresses tossed wildly in the wind.
       Wondering how Jōtarō had been able to put the rocks in place by himself,
she pushed and pulled with the strength of her whole body, but nothing budged.
Exhausted by the effort, she felt a pang of hatred for Jōtarō, and the initial relief
she had felt on locating Osugi turned to gnawing anxiety.
       "Hold on, Granny. Just a little longer. I'll get you out," she shouted.
Though she pressed her lips to a crack in the rocks, she failed to elicit a
response.

      By and by, she made out a low, feeble chant:


           "Or if, meeting man-eating devils,
           Venomous dragons, and demons,
           He thinks of Kannon's power,
           At once none will dare harm him.
           If, surrounded by vicious beasts,
           With sharp tusks and frightening claws,
           He thinks of Kannon's power . . ."


       Osugi was intoning the Sutra on Kannon. Only the voice of the
bodhisattva was perceptible to her. With her hands clasped together, she was at
ease now, tears flowing down her cheeks, lips quivering as the sacred words
poured from them.
       Struck by an odd feeling, Osugi left off her chanting and put her eye to a
crack between the rocks. "Who's there?" she shouted. "I ask you who's there?"
The wind had ripped off Otsū's rain cape. Bewildered, exhausted, covered
       with mud, she bent down and cried, "Are you all right, Granny? It's Otsū."
"Who did you say?" came the suspicious question.
       "I said it's Otsū."
       "I see." There was a long, dead pause before the next incredulous question.
"What do you mean, you're Otsū?"
       It was at this point that the first shock wave hit Osugi, rudely scattering her
religious thoughts. "Wh-why have you come here? Oh, I know. You're looking
for that devil Jōtarō!"
       "No. I've come to rescue you, Granny. Please, forget the past. I remember
how good you were to me when I was a little girl. Then you turned against me
and tried to hurt me. I don't hold it against you. I admit I was very willful."
       "Oh, so your eyes are open now and you can see the evil of your ways. Is
that it? Are you saying you'd like to come back to the Hon'iden family as
Matahachi's wife?"
      "Oh, no, not that," Otsū said quickly.
      "Well, why are you here?"
      "I felt so sorry for you I couldn't stand it."
      "And now you want to put me under obligation to you. That's what you're

      trying to do, isn't it?"
      Otsū was too shocked to say a word.
       "Who asked you to come to my rescue? Not me! And I don't need your
help now. If you think by doing me a favor you can stop me from hating you,
you're mistaken. I don't care how badly off I am; I'd rather die than lose my
pride."
       "But, Granny, how can you expect me to leave a person your age in a
terrible place like this?"
       "There you go, talking nice and sweet. Do you think I don't know what
you and Jōtarō are up to? You two plotted to put me in this cave to make fun of
me, and when I get out, I'm going to get even. You can be sure of that."
       "I'm sure the day will come very soon when you'll understand how I really
feel. Anyway, you can't stay in there. You'll get sick."
       "Hmph. I'm tired of this nonsense."
       Otsū stood up, and the obstacle that she had been unable to budge by force
was dislodged as if by her tears. After the topmost rock rolled to the ground, she
had surprisingly little difficulty rolling the one below it aside.
       But it hadn't been Otsū's tears alone that had opened the cave. Osugi had
been pushing from inside. She burst forth, her face a fiery red.
       Still staggering from the exertion, Otsū uttered a cry of joy, but no sooner
was Osugi in the open than she seized Otsū by the collar. From the fierceness of
the attack, it looked as though her sole purpose in wanting to stay alive was to
attack her benefactor.
      "Oh! What are you doing? Ow!"
      "Shut up!"
      "Wh-wh-why—"
       "What did you expect?" cried Osugi, forcing Otsū to the ground with the
fury of a wild woman. Otsū was horrified beyond belief.
      "Now let's go," snorted Osugi, as she started to drag the girl across the
      sodden ground.
      Clasping her hands together, Otsū said, "Please, please. Punish me if you
      want, but you mustn't stay out in this rain."
      "What idiocy! Have you no shame? Do you think you can make me feel
      sorry for you?"
      "I won't run away. I won't— Oh! That hurts!"
      "Of course it hurts."
      "Let me—" In a sudden burst of strength, Otsū wrenched herself free and

      sprang to her feet.
       "Oh, no you don't!" Instantly renewing the attack, Osugi clutched a fistful
of Otsū's hair. Otsū's white face turned skyward; rain poured down it. She closed
her eyes.
       "You tramp! How I've suffered all these years because of you!"
       Each time Otsū opened her mouth to speak or made an effort to wriggle
free, the old woman gave a vicious tug at her hair. Without letting go of it, she
threw Otsū to the ground, trampled on her and kicked her.
       Then a startled look flashed across Osugi's face and she let go of the hair.
"Oh, what have I done?" she gasped in consternation. "Otsū?" she called
anxiously as she looked at the limp form lying at her feet.
       "Otsū!" Bending down, she stared intently at the rain-soaked face, as cold
to the touch as a dead fish. As far as she could tell, the girl wasn't breathing.
"She's ... she's dead."
       Osugi was aghast. Though unwilling to forgive Otsū, she had not intended
to kill her. She straightened up, moaning and backing away.
       Gradually she quieted down, and it was not long before she was saying,
"Well, I suppose there's nothing to be done but go for help." She started to walk
away, hesitated, turned and came back. Taking Otsū's cold body in her arms, she
carried it into the cave.
       Though the entrance was small, the inside was roomy. Near one wall was a
place where, in the distant past, religious pilgrims seeking the Way had sat for
long hours in meditation.
       When the rain let up, she went to the entrance and was about to crawl out,
when the clouds opened again. From the stream sluicing over the mouth, water
splashed nearly to the innermost part of the cave.
       "It won't be long until morning," she thought. Nonchalantly she squatted
and waited for the storm to die down again.
       Being in total darkness with Otsū's body slowly began to work on her
mind. She had the feeling that the chilly ashen face was staring accusingly at her.
At first she reassured herself by saying, "Everything that happens is destined to
happen. Take your place in paradise as a newborn Buddha. Don't hold a grudge
against me." But before long fear and the sense of her awful responsibility
prompted her to seek refuge in piety. Closing her eyes, she began to chant a
sutra. Several hours passed.
       When at last her lips were silent and she opened her eyes, she could hear
birds chirping. The air was still; the rain had stopped. Through the mouth of the

cave, a golden sun glared at her, shedding fresh white rays on the rough ground
inside.
       "What's that, I wonder?" she said aloud as she got to her feet and her eyes
fell on an inscription carved by some unknown hand on the wall of the cave.
       She stood before it and read: "In the year 1544, I sent my sixteen-year-old
son, whose name was Mori Kinsaku, to fight at the battle of Tenjinzan Castle on
the side of Lord Uragami. I have never seen him since. Because of my grief, I
wander to various places sacred to the Buddha. Now I am placing in this cave an
image of the Bodhisattva Kannon. I pray that this, and a mother's tears, will
protect Kinsaku in his future life. If in later times anyone should pass here, I beg
that he invoke the name of the Buddha. This is the twenty-first year since
Kinsaku's death. Donor: The Mother of Kinsaku, Aita Village."
       The eroded characters were difficult to read in places. It had been nearly
seventy years since the villages nearby—Sanumo, Aita, Katsuta—had been
attacked by the Amako family and Lord Uragami had been driven from his
castle. One childhood memory that would never be erased from Osugi's memory
was the burning of this fortress. She could still see the black smoke billowing up
in the sky, the corpses of men and horses littering the fields and byways for days
afterward. The fighting had reached almost to the houses of the farmers.
       Thinking of the boy's mother, of her sorrow, her wanderings, her prayers
and offerings, Osugi felt a stab of pain. "It must have been terrible for her," she
said. She knelt and joined her hands together.
       "Hail to the Buddha Amida. Hail to the Buddha Amida ..."
       She was sobbing, and tears fell on her hands, but not until she had cried
herself out did her mind again become conscious of Otsū's face, cold and
insensitive to the morning light, by the side of her knee.
       "Forgive me, Otsū. It was wicked of me, terrible! Please forgive me,
please." Her face twisted with remorse, she lifted Otsū's body in a gentle
embrace. "Frightening ... frightening. Blinded by motherly love. Out of devotion
to my own child, I became a devil to another woman's. You had a mother too. If
she had known me, she would have seen me as ... as a vile demon.... I was sure I
was right, but to others I'm a vicious monster."
       The words seemed to fill the cave and bound back to her own ears. There
was no one there, no eyes to watch, no ears to hear. The darkness of night had
become the light of the Buddha's wisdom.
       "How good you were, Otsū. To be tormented so many long years by this
horrible old fool, yet never returning my hatred. To come in spite of everything

to try to save me.... I see it all now. I misunderstood. All the goodness in your
heart I saw as evil. Your kindness I rewarded with hatred. My mind was warped,
distorted. Oh, forgive me, Otsū."
       She pressed her damp face against Otsū's. "If only my son were as sweet
and good as you.... Open your eyes again, see me begging for forgiveness. Open
your mouth, revile me. I deserve it. Otsū ... forgive me."
       While she stared at the face and shed bitter tears, there passed before her
eyes a vision of herself as she must have appeared in all those ugly past
encounters with Otsū. The realization of how thoroughly wicked she had been
gripped at her heart. Over and over she murmured, "Forgive me ... forgive me."
She even wondered if it wouldn't be right to sit there until she joined the girl in
death.
       "No!" she exclaimed decisively. "No more weeping and moaning. Maybe ..
. maybe she's not dead. If I try, maybe I can nurse her back to life. She's still
young. Her life is still ahead of her."
       Gently she laid Otsū back on the ground and crawled out of the cave into
the blinding sunlight. She shut her eyes and cupped her hands to her mouth.
"Where is everybody? You people from the village, come here! Help!" Opening
her eyes, she ran forward a few steps, still shouting.
       There was some movement in the cryptomeria grove, then a shout: "She's
here. She's all right after all!"
       About ten members of the Hon'iden clan came out of the grove. After
hearing the story told by the blood-smeared survivor of the fight with Jōtarō the
night before, they had organized a search party and set out immediately, despite
the blinding rain. Still wearing their rain capes, they had a bedraggled look about
them.
       "Ah, you're safe," exulted the first man to reach Osugi. They gathered
around her, their faces reflecting their immense relief.
       "Don't worry about me," Osugi commanded. "Quick, go and see if you can
do something for that girl in the cave. She's been unconscious for hours. If we
don't give her some medicine right away ..." Her voice was thick. Almost in a
trance, she pointed toward the cave. Perhaps not since Uncle Gon's death had the
tears she'd shed been those of grief.
