The Tides of Life


       Autumn passed. And winter.
       On a day early in the fourth month of 1612, passengers were arranging
themselves on the deck of the regular ship from Sakai in Izumi Province to
Shimonoseki in Nagato.
       Informed the ship was ready to leave, Musashi got up from a bench in
Kobayashi Tarōzaemon's shop and bowed to the people who had come to see
him off.
       "Keep your spirits up," they urged as they joined him for the short walk to
the pier.
       Hon'ami Kōetsu's face was among those present. His good friend Haiya
Shōyū had been unable to come because of illness, but he was represented by his
son Shōeki. With Shōeki was his wife, a woman whose dazzling beauty turned
heads wherever she went.
      "That's Yoshino, isn't it?" a man whispered, tugging at his companion's
      sleeve.
      "From Yanagimachi?"
      "Umm. Yoshino Dayū of the Ogiya."
       Shōeki had introduced her to Musashi without mentioning her former
name. Her face was unfamiliar to Musashi, of course, for this was the second
Yoshino Dayū. Nobody knew what had happened to the first one, where she was
now, whether she was married or single. People had long since stopped talking
about her great beauty. Flowers bloomed and flowers fell. In the floating world
of the licensed quarter, time passed rapidly.
       Yoshino Dayū. The name would have evoked memories of snowy nights,
of a fire made of peony wood, of a broken lute.
       "It's been eight years now since we first met," remarked Kōetsu.
       "Yes, eight years," echoed Musashi, wondering where the years could have
gone. He had the feeling his boarding the ship today marked the close of one
phase of his life.
       Matahachi was among the well-wishers, as were several samurai from the
Hosokawa residence in Kyoto. Other samurai conveyed best wishes from Lord
Karasumaru Mitsuhiro, and there was a group of between twenty and thirty

swordsmen who, despite Musashi's protest, had been led by their acquaintance
with him in Kyoto to regard themselves as his followers.
       He was going to Kokura in the province of Buzen, where he would face
Sasaki Kojirō in a test of skill and maturity. Due to the efforts of Nagaoka Sado,
the fateful confrontation, so long in the making, was finally to take place.
Negotiations had been long and difficult, necessitating the dispatch of many
couriers and letters. Even after Sado had ascertained the previous autumn that
Musashi was at Hon'ami Kōetsu's house, completion of the arrangements had
required another half year.
       Though he knew it was coming, Musashi had not in his wildest dreams
been able to imagine what it would be like to set forth as the champion of a huge
number of followers and admirers. The size of the crowd was an embarrassment.
It also made it impossible for him to talk as he would have liked to with certain
people.
       What struck him most forcefully about this great send-off was its
absurdity. He had no desire to be anybody's idol. Still, they were here to express
their goodwill. There was no way to stop them.
       Some, he felt, understood him. For their good wishes he was grateful; their
admiration infused him with a sense of reverence. At the same time, he was
being swept up on a wave of that frivolous sentiment called popularity. His
reaction was almost one of fear, that the adulation might go to his head. He was,
after all, only an ordinary man.
       Another thing that upset him was the long prelude. If it could be said that
both he and Kojirō saw where their relationship was leading them, it could also
be said that the world had pitted them one against the other and decreed that they
must decide once and for all who was the better man.
       It had started with people saying, "I hear they're going to have it out."
Later, it was: "Yes, they're definitely going to face each other."
       Still later: "When is the bout?"
       Finally, the very day and hour were being bruited about before the
principals themselves had formally decided them.
       Musashi resented being a public hero. In view of his exploits, it was
inevitable that he would be made one, but he did not seek this. What he really
wanted was more time to himself for meditation. He needed to develop harmony,
to make sure his ideas did not outpace his ability to act. Through his most recent
experience with Gudō, he had advanced a step on the path toward enlightenment.
And he had come to sense more keenly the difficulty of following the Way—the

long Way through life.
       "And yet . . ." he thought. Where would he be if it were not for the
goodness of the people who supported him? Would he be alive? Would he have
the clothes on his back? He was dressed in a black short-sleeved kimono sewn
for him by Kōetsu's mother. His new sandals, the new basket hat in his hand, all
the belongings he carried now, had been given to him by someone who valued
him. The rice he ate—grown by other people. He lived on the bounties of labor
not his own. How could he repay people for all they had done for him?
       When his thoughts turned in this direction, his resentment at the demands
made on him by his legion of supporters lessened. Nevertheless, the fear of
letting them down lingered.
       It was time to set sail. There were prayers for a safe voyage, final words of
farewell, invisible time already flowing between the men and women on the pier
and their departing hero.
       The moorings were cast off, the ship drifted toward the open sea, and the
great sail spread like wings against the azure sky.
       A man ran out to the end of the pier, stopped and stamped his foot in
disgust. "Too late!" he growled. "I shouldn't have taken a nap."
       Kōetsu approached him and asked, "Aren't you Musō Gonnosuke?" "Yes,"
he replied, tucking his staff under his arm.
      "I met you once at the Kongōji in Kawachi."
      "Yes, of course. You're Hon'ami Kōetsu."
      "I'm glad to see you're well. From what I heard, I wasn't sure you were still
      alive."
      "Heard from who?"
      "Musashi."
      "Musashi?"
       "Yes; he was staying with me until yesterday. He had several letters from
Kokura. In one, Nagaoka Sado said you'd been taken prisoner on Mount Kudo.
He thought you might have been injured or killed."
      "It was all a mistake."
      "We learned, too, that Iori is living at Sado's house."
      "Then he's safe!" he exclaimed, relief flooding his face.
      "Yes. Let's sit down somewhere and talk."
       He steered the burly staff expert to a nearby shop. Over tea, Gonnosuke
told his story. Luckily for him, after one look Sanada Yukimura had come to the
conclusion he was not a spy. Gonnosuke was released, and the two men became

friendly. Yukimura not only apologized for his subordinates' error, but sent a
group of men to search for Iori.
       When they failed to find the boy's body, Gonnosuke assumed he was still
alive. He had spent his time since then searching the neighboring provinces.
When he heard that Musashi was in Kyoto and a bout between him and Kojirō
was imminent, he had intensified his efforts. Then, returning to Mount Kudo
yesterday, he had learned from Yukimura that Musashi was to sail for Kokura
today. He had dreaded facing Musashi without Iori at his side, or any news of
him. But not knowing whether he would ever again see his teacher alive, he
came anyway. He apologized to Kōetsu as though the latter were a victim of his
negligence.
       "Don't let it worry you," said Kōetsu. "There'll be another ship in a few
days."
       "I really wanted to travel with Musashi." He paused, then went on
earnestly. "I think this trip may be the decisive point in Musashi's life. He
disciplines himself constantly. He isn't likely to lose to Kojirō. Still, in a fight
like that, you never know. There's a superhuman element involved. All warriors
have to face it; winning or losing is partly a matter of luck."
       "I don't think you need to worry. Musashi's composure was perfect. He
seemed completely confident."
       "I'm sure he did, but Kojirō has a high reputation too. And they say since
he went into Lord Tadatoshi's service, he's been practicing and keeping himself
fit."
       "It'll be a test of strength between a man who's a genius, but really
somewhat conceited, and an ordinary man who's polished his talents to the
utmost, won't it?"
       "I wouldn't call Musashi ordinary."
       "But he is. That's what's extraordinary about him. He's not content with
relying on whatever natural gifts he may have. Knowing he's ordinary, he's
always trying to improve himself. No one appreciates the agonizing effort he's
had to make. Now that his years of training have yielded such spectacular
results, everybody's talking about his 'god-given talent.' That's how men who
don't try very hard comfort themselves."
       "Thank you for saying that," said Gonnosuke. He felt Kōetsu might have
been referring to him, as well as to Musashi. Looking at the older man's broad,
placid profile, he thought: "It's the same with him too."
       Kōetsu looked like what he was, a man of leisure who had deliberately set

himself apart from the rest of the world. At the moment, his eyes lacked that
gleam that emanated from them when he concentrated on artistic creation. Now
they were like a smooth sea, calm and unruffled, under a clear, bright sky.
       A young man stuck his head in the door and said to Kōetsu, "Shall we go
back now?"
       "Ah, Matahachi," Kōetsu replied amiably. Turning to Gonnosuke, he said,
"I suppose I'll have to leaye you. My companions seem to be waiting."
       "Are you going back by way of Osaka?"
       "Yes. If we get there in time, I'd like to take the evening boat to Kyoto."
"Well, then, I'll walk that far with you." Rather than wait here for the next boat,
Gonnosuke had decided to travel overland.
       The three of them walked side by side, their talk rarely straying from
Musashi, his present status and past exploits. At one point, Matahachi expressed
concern, saying, "I hope Musashi wins, but Kojirō's sharp. His technique is
terrific, you know." But his voice lacked enthusiasm; the memory of his own
encounter with Kojirō was too vivid.
       By twilight, they were on the crowded streets of Osaka. Simultaneously
Kōetsu and Gonnosuke noticed Matahachi was no longer with them.
       "Where could he have gone?" asked Kōetsu.
       Retracing their steps, they found him standing by the end of the bridge. He
was looking spellbound out over the riverbank, where wives from nearby
dwellings, a row of broken-down shacks covered by a single roof, were washing
cooking utensils, unhulled rice and vegetables.
       "That's an odd expression on his face," said Gonnosuke. He and Kōetsu
stood a little apart and watched.
       "It is her," cried Matahachi. "Akemi!"
       In the first flash of recognition, he was struck by the capriciousness of fate.
But immediately it began to seem otherwise. Destiny was not playing tricks—
merely confronting him with his past. She had been his common-law wife. Their
karmas, too, were entwined. So long as they inhabited the same earth, they were
fated to come together again, sooner or later.
       He'd had trouble recognizing her. The charm and coquettishness of even
two years ago had vanished. Her face was incredibly thin; her hair was
unwashed and tied in a bun. She wore a tubular-sleeved cotton kimono reaching
slightly below her knees, the utilitarian garment of all lower-class urban
housewives. It was a far cry from the colorful silks she had donned as a
prostitute.

       She was crouching down in the position expected of peddlers and had in
her arms a heavy-looking basket, from which she was selling clams, abalone and
kelp. The things still left unsold suggested business was not very good.
       Tied to her back with a soiled strip of cloth was a baby about a year old.
       More than anything else, it was the child that made Matahachi's heart beat
faster. Pressing his palms against his cheeks, he counted up the months. If the
baby was in its second year, it had been conceived while they were in Edo... and
Akemi had been pregnant when they were publicly whipped.
       The light of the evening sun, reflected from the river, danced on
Matahachi's face, making it seem bathed in tears. He was deaf to the bustle of
traffic moving along the street. Akemi was walking slowly down by the river. He
started after her, waving his arms and shouting. Kōetsu and Gonnosuke
followed.
       "Matahachi, where are you going?"
       He had forgotten all about the two men. He stopped and waited for them to
catch up. "I'm sorry," he mumbled. "To tell the truth ... " Truth? How could he
explain to them what he was going to do when he couldn't explain it to himself?
Sorting out his emotions was beyond him at the moment, but finally he blurted
out, "I've decided not to be a priest—to return to ordinary life. I haven't been
ordained yet."
       "Returning to ordinary life?" exclaimed Kōetsu. "So suddenly? Hmm. You
look strange."
       "I can't explain it now. Even if I did, it'd probably sound crazy. I just saw
the woman I used to live with. And she's carrying a baby on her back. I think it
must be mine."
      "Are you sure?"
      "Yes, well ... "
      "Now calm down and think. Is it really your child?"
       "Yes! I'm a father! ... I'm sorry. I didn't know ... I'm ashamed. I can't let her
go through life like that—selling things out of a basket like a common tramp.
I've got to go to work and help my child."
       Kōetsu and Gonnosuke looked at each other in dismay. Though not quite
sure whether Matahachi was still in his right mind, Kōetsu said, "I suppose you
know what you're doing."
       Matahachi took off the priest's robe covering his ordinary kimono and
handed it to Kōetsu, together with his prayer beads. "I'm sorry to trouble you, but
will you give these to Gudō at the Myōshinji? I'd appreciate it if you'd tell him

I'm going to stay here in Osaka, get a job and be a good father."
      "Are you sure you want to do this? Give up the priesthood, just like that?"
      "Yes. Anyway, the master told me I could go back to ordinary life anytime I
      wanted to."
      "Hmm."
       "He said you don't have to be in a temple to practice religious discipline.
It's more difficult, but he said it's more praiseworthy to be able to control
yourself and keep your faith in the midst of lies and filth and conflict—all the
ugly things in the outside world—than in the clean, pure surroundings of a
temple."
       "I'm sure he's right."
       "I've been with him more than a year now, but he hasn't given me a priestly
name. Always just calls me Matahachi. Maybe something'll come up in the
future I don't understand. Then I'll go to him immediately. Tell him that for me,
won't you?"
       And with that, Matahachi was gone.
