Hemp Seed


       Hyōgo was growing concerned. After going to Otsū's room with a letter
from Takuan in his hand, he'd searched for her all over the castle grounds, more
and more urgently as the hours passed.
       The letter, dated the tenth month of the previous year but inexplicably
delayed, told of Musashi's pending appointment as an instructor to the shōgun.
Takuan had asked that Otsū come to the capital as soon as possible, since
Musashi would soon need a house as well as "someone to look after it." Hyōgo
couldn't wait to see her face light up.
       Not finding her, he finally went to question the guard at the gate and was
told men were out looking for her. Hyōgo took a deep breath, thinking how
unlike Otsū it was to cause people to worry, how unlike her not to leave word.
She rarely acted impulsively, even in the smallest matters.
       Before he began to imagine the worst, however, news came that they were
back, Otsū with Sukekurō, and Ushinosuke with the men sent to Tsukigase. The
boy, apologizing to everyone for no one knew what, was obviously in a hurry to
be on his way.
       "Where do you think you're going?" asked one of the attendants.
       "I've got to get back to Araki. My mother will worry if I don't."
       "If you try to go back now," said Sukekurō, "those rōnin will get you, and
it's not likely they'd let you go alive. You can stay here tonight and go home in
the morning."
       Ushinosuke mumbled something vaguely acquiescent and was told to go to
a wood storehouse in the outer encirclement, where the apprentice samurai slept.
       Beckoning to Otsū, Hyōgo took her aside and told her what Takuan had
written. He wasn't surprised when she said, "I'll leave in the morning," a deep
blush revealing her feelings.
       Hyōgo then reminded her of Munenori's coming visit and suggested she
return to Edo with him, though he knew quite well what her answer would be.
She was in no mood to wait two more days, much less two more months. He
made another attempt, saying that if she waited until after the funeral service,
she could travel with him as far as Nagoya, since he'd been invited to become a
vassal of Lord Tokugawa of Owari. When she again demurred, he told her how

much the idea of her making the long journey alone displeased him. In every
town and inn along the way she would encounter inconveniences, if not actual
danger.
       She smiled. "You seem to forget. I'm used to traveling. There's nothing for
you to worry about."
       That evening, at a modest farewell party, everyone expressed his affection
for Otsū, and the next morning, which was bright and clear, family and servants
gathered at the front gate to see her off.
       Sukekurō sent a man to fetch Ushinosuke, thinking that Otsū could ride his
ox as far as Uji. When the man returned and reported the boy had gone home the
night before after all, Sukekurō ordered a horse to be brought.
       Otsū, feeling she was of too low a status to be so favored, refused the offer,
but Hyōgo insisted. The horse, a dapple gray, was led by an apprentice samurai
down the gentle slope to the outer gate.
       Hyōgo went partway, then stopped. He couldn't deny it. At times he envied
Musashi, as he would have envied any man whom Otsū loved. That her heart
belonged to another did not diminish his affection for her. She'd been a delightful
companion on the trip down from Edo, and in the subsequent weeks and months
he had marveled at the devotion with which she had cared for his grandfather.
Though deeper than ever, his love for her was selfless. Sekishūsai had instructed
him to deliver her to Musashi safely; Hyōgo intended to do just that. It wasn't his
nature to covet another man's good fortune nor to think of depriving him of it.
He could not think of any act as being apart from the Way of the Samurai;
carrying out his grandfather's wish would in itself have been an expression of his
love.
       He was lost in reverie when Otsū turned and bowed her thanks to her well-
wishers. As she set off, she brushed against some plum blossoms. Unconsciously
watching the petals fall, Hyōgo could almost smell the fragrance. He felt he was
seeing her for the last time and took comfort in a silent prayer for her future life.
He stood and stared as she disappeared from sight.
       "Sir."
       Hyōgo turned around and a smile came slowly to his face. "Ushinosuke.
Well, well. I hear you went home last night after I told you not to."
       "Yes, sir; my mother . . ." He was still at an age when mention of
separation from his mother brought him to the verge of tears.
      "That's all right. It's good for a boy to take care of his mother. But how did
      you get by those rōnin at Tsukigase?"

     "Oh, that was easy."
     "Was it, now?"
       The boy smiled. "They weren't there. They heard Otsū was from the castle,
so they were afraid of being attacked. I guess they must've gone to the other side
of the mountain."
       "Ha, ha. We don't have to worry about them anymore, do we? Have you
had breakfast?"
       "No," said Ushinosuke, slightly embarrassed. "I got up early to dig some
wild potatoes for Master Kimura. If you like them, I'll bring you some too."
"Thank you."
     "Do you know where Otsū is?"
     "She just left for Edo."
     "Edo? . . ." Hesitantly he said, "I wonder if she asked you or Master Kimura
     what I wanted her to."
     "And what was that?"
     "I've been hoping you'd let me become a samurai's attendant."
     "You're still a little too young for that. Maybe when you're older."
     "But I want to learn swordsmanship. Won't you teach me, please. I have to
     learn while my mother's still alive."
     "Have you been studying under someone?"
       "No, but I've practiced using my wooden sword on trees and animals."
"That's a good way to start. When you get a little older, you can come and join
me in Nagoya. I'm going there to live soon."
       "That's way off in Owari, isn't it? I can't go so far away, not while my
mother's still alive."
       Hyōgo, not unmoved, said, "Come with me." Ushinosuke followed along
silently. "We'll go to the dōjō. I'll see if you have the natural ability to become a
swordsman."
       "The dōjō?" Ushinosuke wondered if he was dreaming. Since early
childhood, he'd regarded the ancient Yagyū dōjō as symbolizing everything he
aspired to in the world. Though Sukekurō had said he could enter, he had not
done so yet. But now, to be invited inside by a member of the family!
       "Rinse your feet."
       "Yes, sir." Ushinosuke went to a small pond near the entrance and very
carefully washed his feet, taking care to remove the dirt from under his toenails.
       Once inside, he felt small and insignificant. The beams and rafters were
old and massive, the floor polished to a sheen he could see his reflection in.

Even Hyōgo's voice when he said, "Get a sword," sounded different.
      Ushinosuke selected a black-oak sword from among the weapons hanging
on one wall. Hyōgo took one too, and with the point directed toward the floor,
walked to the middle of the room.
      "Are you ready?" he asked coldly.
      "Yes," said Ushinosuke, raising his weapon to chest level.
      Hyōgo opened his stance slightly on the diagonal. Ushinosuke was puffed
up like a hedgehog. His eyebrows were raised, his face was set in a fierce frown,
and his blood raced. When Hyōgo signaled with his eyes that he was about to
attack, Ushinosuke grunted loudly. Feet pounding the floor, Hyōgo advanced
rapidly and struck laterally at Ushinosuke's waist.
      "Not yet!" shouted the boy. As though kicking the floor away from him, he
leaped high in the air, clearing Hyōgo's shoulder. Hyōgo reached out with his left
hand and lightly pushed the boy's feet upward. Ushinosuke did a somersault and
landed behind Hyōgo. He was up in a split second, running to retrieve his sword.
      "That's enough," said Hyōgo.
      "No; once more!"
      Grabbing his sword, Ushinosuke held it high over his head with both
hands and flew like an eagle toward Hyōgo. Hyōgo's weapon, aimed straight at
him, stopped him dead in his tracks. He saw the look in Hyōgo's eyes and his
own filled with tears.
      "This boy has spirit," thought Hyōgo, but he pretended to be angry. "You're
fighting dirty," he shouted. "You jumped over my shoulder."
      Ushinosuke did not know what to say to that.
      "You don't understand your status—taking liberties with your betters! Sit
down, right there." The .boy knelt and put his hands out in front of him to bow in
apology. As he came toward him, Hyōgo dropped the wooden sword and drew
his own weapon. "I'll kill you now. Don't bother to scream."
      "K-k-kill me?"
      "Stick out your neck. For a samurai, nothing is more important than
abiding by the rules of proper conduct. Even if you are only a farm boy, what
you did is unforgivable."
      "You're going to kill me just for doing something rude?"
      "That's right."
      After looking up at the samurai for a moment, Ushinosuke, resignation in
his eyes, lifted his hands in the direction of his village and said, "Mother, I'm
going to become part of the soil here at the castle. I know how sad you'll feel.

Forgive me for not being a good son." Then he obediently extended his neck.
       Hyōgo laughed and put his sword back in its scabbard. Patting Ushinosuke
on the back, he said, "You don't think I'd really kill a boy like you, do you?"
      "You weren't serious?"
      "No."
      "You said proper conduct is important. Is it all right for a samurai to play
      jokes like that?"
      "It wasn't a joke. If you're going to train to become a samurai, I have to
      know what you're made of."
      "I thought you meant it," said Ushinosuke, his breathing returning to
      normal.
       "You told me you hadn't had lessons," said Hyōgo. "But when I forced you
to the edge of the room, you jumped over my shoulder. Not many students, even
with three or four years of training, could execute that ploy."
      "I never studied with anyone, though."
      "It's nothing to hide. You must have had a teacher, and a good one. Who
      was he?"
      The boy thought for a moment, then said, "Oh, I remember how I learned
      that."
      "Who taught you?"
      "It wasn't a human being."
      "A goblin maybe?"
      "No, a hemp seed."
      "What?"
      "A hemp seed."
      "How could you learn from a hemp seed?"
       "Well, way up in the mountains there are some of those fighters—you
know, the ones who seem to disappear right in front of your eyes. I watched
them train a couple of times."
       "You mean the ninja, don't you? It must have been the Iga group you saw.
But what does that have to do with a hemp seed?"
       "Well, after hemp's planted in the spring, it doesn't take long before a little
sprout comes up."
       "Yes?"
       "You jump over it. Every day you practice jumping back and forth. When
it gets warmer, the sprout grows fast—nothing else grows as fast—so you have
to jump higher every day. If you don't practice every day, it's not long before the

hemp is so high you can't jump over it."
      "I see."
      "I did it last year, and the year before that. From spring till fall."
      Sukekurō came into the dōjō just then and said, "Hyōgo, here's another
      letter from Edo."
       After Hyōgo read it, he said, "Otsū couldn't have gone very far, could
she?" "Not more than five miles, probably. Has something come up?"
      "Yes. Takuan says Musashi's appointment has been canceled. They seem to
      have doubts about his character. I don't think we should let Otsū go on to
      Edo
      without telling her."
      "I'll go."
      "No. I'll go myself."
      With a nod to Ushinosuke, Hyōgo left the dōjō and went directly to the
      stable.
       He was halfway to Uji when he began to have second thoughts. Musashi's
not receiving the appointment would make no difference to Otsū; she was
thinking of the man himself, not his status. Even if Hyōgo managed to persuade
her to stay a while longer in Koyagyū, she would no doubt want to go on to Edo.
Why spoil her journey by telling her the bad news?
       He turned back toward Koyagyū and slowed down to a trot. Though he
appeared to be at peace with the world, a fierce battle raged in his heart. If only
he could see Otsū once more! While he had to admit to himself this was the real
reason for going after her, he would not have admitted it to anyone else.
       Hyōgo tried to rein in his emotions. Warriors had weak moments, foolish
moments, like everybody else. Still, his duty, that of every samurai, was clear: to
persevere until he reached a state of stoic balance. Once he had crossed the
barrier of illusion, his soul would be light and free, his eyes open to the green
willows around him, to every blade of grass. Love was not the only emotion
capable of firing a samurai's heart. His was another world. In an age hungry for
young men of talent, this was no time to be distracted by a flower along the
wayside. What was important, as Hyōgo saw it, was to be in the right place to
ride the wave of the times.


      "Quite a crowd, isn't it?" Hyōgo remarked lightheartedly.
      "Yes; Nara doesn't have many days as fine as this," replied Sukekurō. "It's

like an outing."
       Following a few steps behind them was Ushinosuke, for whom Hyōgo was
developing quite a fondness. The boy came to the castle more frequently now
and was on his way to becoming a regular attendant. He carried their lunches on
his back and had an extra pair of sandals for Hyōgo tied to his obi.
       They were in an open field in the middle of town. On one side, the five-
story pagoda of the Kōfukuji rose above the surrounding woods; visible across
the field were the houses of the Buddhist and Shinto priests. Though the day was
bright and the air springlike, a thin mist hung over the lower areas, where
townsmen lived. The crowd, numbering between four and five hundred people,
did not seem that large because of the vastness of the field. Some of the deer, for
which Nara was famous, were nosing their way among the spectators, sniffing
out tasty morsels of food here and there.
      "They haven't finished already, have they?" asked Hyōgo.
      "No," said Sukekurō. "They seem to be taking time off for lunch." "So even
      priests have to eat!"
      Sukekurō laughed.
       The occasion was a show of sorts. The larger cities had theaters, but in
Nara and the smaller towns, shows were held in the open air. Magicians,
dancers, puppeteers, as well as archers and swordsmen, all performed outdoors.
Today's attraction was more than mere entertainment, though. Each year the
lancer-priests of the Hōzōin held a tournament, at which they decided the order
of seating at the temple. Since they were performing in public, the competitors
fought hard, and the bouts were often violent and spectacular. There was a sign
in front of the Kōfukuji, clearly stating that the tournament was open to all who
were devoted to the martial arts, but the outsiders who dared face the lancer-
priests were very, very few.
       "Why don't we sit down somewhere and have our lunch?" said Hyōgo.
"We seem to have plenty of time."
       "Where would be a good spot?" said Sukekurō, looking around.
       "Over here," called Ushinosuke. "You can sit on this." He indicated a piece
of reed matting he had picked up somewhere and spread on a pleasant knoll.
Hyōgo admired the boy's resourcefulness and, in general, was pleased by the
way his needs were looked after, although he did not regard solicitousness as an
ideal quality for a future samurai.
       After they had arranged themselves, Ushinosuke passed out their simple
fare: balls of unpolished rice, sour plum pickles and sweetish bean paste, all

wrapped in dried bamboo to make them easier to carry.
       "Ushinosuke," said Sukekurō, "run over to those priests there and get some
tea. But don't tell them who it's for."
       "It'd be a nuisance if they came over to pay their respects," added Hyōgo,
who had a basket hat pulled down over his face. Sukekurō's features were more
than half hidden by a bandanna of the type worn by priests.
       As Ushinosuke got to his feet, another boy, about fifty feet away, was
saying, "I can't understand it. The matting was right here."
       "Forget it, Iori," said Gonnosuke. "It's no great loss."
       "Somebody must have swiped it. Who do you suppose would do a thing
like that?"
       "Don't worry about it." Gonnosuke sat down on the grass, took out his
brush and ink and began listing his expenses in a small notebook, a habit he had
recently acquired from Iori.
       In some ways, Iori was too serious for his years. He paid close attention to
his personal finances, never wasted a thing, was meticulously neat, and felt
grateful for every bowl of rice, every fair day. He was, in short, fastidious, and
he looked down on people who were not.
      For anyone who'd walk off with another person's property, even if it was
      only a cheap piece of matting, he had only contempt.
      "Oh, there it is," he cried. "Those men over there took it. Hey, you!"
      He ran toward them, but stopped about ten paces short to consider what he
      was going to say and found himself face to face with Ushinosuke. "What do
      you want?" growled Ushinosuke.
      "What do you mean, what do I want?" snapped Iori.
      Regarding him with the coldness country folk reserve for outsiders,
      Ushinosuke said, "You're the one who called to us!"
      "Anybody who goes off with somebody else's things is a thief!" "Thief?
      Why, you son of a bitch!"
      "That matting belongs to us."
      "Matting? I found it lying on the ground. Is that all you're upset about?"
       "A mat's important to a traveler," said Iori rather pompously. "It protects
him from the rain, provides him with something to sleep on. Lots of things. Give
it back!"
       "You can have it, but first take back what you said about me being a thief!"
"I don't have to apologize to get back what belongs to us. If you don't give it
back, I'll take it back!"

       "Just try it. I'm Ushinosuke of Araki. I have no intention of losing to a runt
like you. I'm the disciple of a samurai."
       "I bet you are," said Iori, standing a little straighter. "You talk big with all
these people around, but you wouldn't dare fight if we were by ourselves."
      "I won't forget that!"
      "Come over there later."
      "Where?"
      "By the pagoda. Come alone."
       They parted, Ushinosuke went for the tea, and by the time he came back
with an earthenware teapot, the matches were under way again. Standing in a
large circle with the other spectators, Ushinosuke looked pointedly at Iori,
challenging him with his eyes. Iori's eyes answered. Both believed that winning
was all that counted.
       The noisy crowd pushed this way and that, raising yellow clouds of dust.
In the center of the circle stood a priest with a lance as long as a fowling pole.
One after another, rivals stepped forward and challenged him. One after another,
they were struck to the ground or sent flying through the air.
       "Come forward," he cried, but eventually no more came. "If there's no one
else, I'm going to leave. Is there any objection to declaring me, Nankōbō, the
winner?" After studying under In'ei, he had created a style of his own and was
now the chief rival of Inshun, who was absent today on the pretext of illness. No
one knew whether he was afraid of Nankōbō or preferred to avoid conflict.
       When no one came forward, the burly priest lowered his lance, holding it
horizontally, and announced, "There's no challenger."
       "Wait," called a priest, running out in front of Nankōbō. "I'm Daun, a
disciple of Inshun. I challenge you."
       "Get ready."
       After bowing to each other, the two men jumped apart. Their two lances
stared at each other like living beings for such a long time that the crowd, bored,
began shouting for action. Then all at once the shouting ceased. Nankōbō's lance
thudded into Daun's head, and, like a scarecrow toppled by the wind, his body
leaned slowly to the side, then fell suddenly to the ground. Three or four lancers
ran forward, not to take revenge but merely to drag the body away.
       Nankōbō arrogantly threw back his shoulders and surveyed the crowd.
"There seem to be a few brave men left. If indeed there are, come ahead."
       A mountain priest stepped out from behind a tent, took his traveling chest
off his back and asked, "Is the tournament open only to lancers of the Hōzōin?"

      "No," chorused the Hōzōin priests.
      The priest bowed. "In that case, I'd like to try my hand. Can anyone lend me
      a wooden sword?"
      Hyōgo glanced at Sukekurō and said, "This is getting interesting." "It is,
      isn't it?"
      "No question about the outcome."
      "I don't suppose there's any chance of Nankōbō's losing."
      "That's not what I meant. I don't think Nankōbō will agree to fight. If he
      does, he'll lose."
      Sukekurō looked puzzled but didn't ask for an explanation.
       Someone handed the vagabond priest a wooden sword. He walked up to
Nankōbō, bowed and issued his challenge. He was a man of about forty, but his
body, like spring steel, strongly suggested training not in the ascetic fashion of
mountain priests but on the battlefield, a man who must have faced death many
times and would be prepared to accept it philosophically. His manner of
speaking was soft, his eyes placid.
       Despite his arrogance, Nankōbō was no fool. "Are you an outsider?" he
asked pointlessly.
       "Yes," replied the challenger with another bow.
       "Wait just a minute." Nankōbō saw two things clearly: His technique
might be better than the priest's. He couldn't win in the long run. Quite a few
celebrated warriors, defeated at Sekigahara, were still masquerading as
wandering priests. There was no telling who this man was.
       "I can't take on an outsider," he said, shaking his head.
       "I just asked the rules and was told it was all right."
       "It may be all right with others, but I prefer not to fight outsiders. When I
fight, it's not for the purpose of defeating my opponent. It's a religious activity, in
which I discipline my soul by means of the lance."
       "I see," said the priest with a little laugh. He seemed to have something
more to say, but hesitated. After mulling it over for a moment, he retired from
the ring, returned the wooden sword and disappeared.
       Nankōbō chose this time to make his exit, ignoring the whispered
comments that it was cowardly of him to back out. Trailed by two or three
disciples, he strode away grandly, like a conquering general.
       "What did I tell you?" said Hyōgo.
       "You were absolutely right."
       "That man is without a doubt one of those hiding out on Mount Kudo.

Change his white robe and bandanna for a helmet and armor, and you'll find
you're looking at one of the great swordsmen of a few years ago."
       When the crowd thinned out, Sukekurō began looking around for
Ushinosuke. He didn't find him. At a signal from Iori, he had gone over to the
pagoda, where now they stood glaring fiercely at each other.
       "Don't blame me if you get killed," said Iori.
       "You talk big," said Ushinosuke, picking up a stick to use as a weapon.
       Iori, sword held high, rushed to the attack. Ushinosuke jumped back.
Thinking he was afraid, Iori ran straight at him. Ushinosuke leaped over him,
kicking him in the side of the head. Iori's hand went to his head, and he crashed
to the ground. Recovering quickly, he was on his feet again in no time. The two
boys faced each other with their weapons raised.
       Forgetting what Musashi and Gonnosuke had taught him, Iori charged with
his eyes shut. Ushinosuke moved slightly to one side and knocked him down
with his stick.
      Iori lay on his stomach, moaning, sword still in hand.
      "Ha! I won," shouted Ushinosuke. Then, noticing that Iori was not moving
      at all, he grew frightened and ran.
      "No you don't!" roared Gonnosuke, his four-foot staff catching the boy on
      the hip.
       Ushinosuke fell with a shriek of pain, but after one look at Gonnosuke, he
got to his feet and bounded off like a rabbit, only to collide head on with
Sukekurō.
       "Ushinosuke! What's going on here?"
       Ushinosuke quickly hid behind Sukekurō, leaving the samurai face to face
with Gonnosuke. For a moment, it appeared that a clash was inevitable.
Sukekurō's hand went to his sword; Gonnosuke tightened his grip on the staff.
"Would you mind telling me," asked Sukekurō, "why you're chasing a mere child
as though you wanted to kill him?"
      "Before I answer, let me ask a question. Did you see him knock that boy
      down?"
      "Is he with you?"
      "Yes. Is this one of your attendants?"
       "Not officially." Looking sternly at Ushinosuke, he asked, "Why did you
hit the boy and run away? Tell the truth, now."
       Before Ushinosuke could open his mouth, Iori raised his head and shouted,
"It was a bout." Rising painfully to a sitting position, he said, "We had a bout and

I lost."
       "Did you two challenge each other in the proper way and agree to fight it
out?" asked Gonnosuke. There was a trace of amusement in his eyes as he
looked from one to the other.
       Ushinosuke, deeply embarrassed, said, "I didn't know it was his mat when
I picked it up."
       The two men grinned at each other, both aware that if they had not acted
with restraint themselves, a trivial, childish affair could have ended in
bloodshed.
       "I'm very sorry about this," said Sukekurō.
       "So am I. I hope you'll forgive me."
       "Don't mention it. My master's waiting for us, so I think we'd better go."
They went out the gate laughing, Gonnosuke and Iori going to the left, Sukekurō
and Ushinosuke to the right.
       Then Gonnosuke turned and said, "Could I ask you something? If we go
straight down this road, will it take us to Koyagyū Castle?"
       Sukekurō walked over to Gonnosuke and some minutes later, when Hyōgo
       joined them, told him who the travelers were and why they were here.
Hyōgo sighed sympathetically. "That's too bad. If only you'd come three
      weeks ago, before Otsū left to join Musashi in Edo."
      "He's not in Edo," said Gonnosuke. "No one knows where he is, not even
      his friends."
      "What'll she do now?" said Hyōgo, regretting he hadn't brought Otsū back
      to Koyagyū.
       Though he held back his tears, Iori really wanted to go somewhere all
alone and cry his heart out. On the way down, he'd talked incessantly of meeting
Otsū, or so it had seemed to Gonnosuke. As the men's conversation shifted to
events in Edo, he slowly drifted away. Hyōgo asked Gonnosuke for more
information about Musashi, for news about his uncle, for details about the
disappearance of Ono Tadaaki. There seemed to be no end either to his questions
or to Gonnosuke's supply of information.
       "Where're you going?" Ushinosuke asked Iori, coming up behind him and
laying a sympathetic hand on his shoulder. "Are you crying?"
      "Of course not." But as he shook his head, the tears flew.
      "Hmm.... Do you know how to dig wild potatoes?"
      "Sure."
      "There are some potatoes over there. You want to see who can dig the

      fastest?"
      Iori accepted the challenge, and they began digging.
       It was getting late in the day, and since there was still much to talk about,
Hyōgo urged Gonnosuke to spend a few days at the castle. Gonnosuke, however,
said he preferred to continue his journey.
       While they were saying their farewells, they noticed the boys were missing
again. After a moment, Sukekurō pointed and said, "There they are, over there.
They seem to be digging."
       Iori and Ushinosuke were absorbed in their work, which because of the
brittleness of the roots, involved digging carefully to a great depth. The men,
amused at their concentration, walked quietly up behind them and watched for
several minutes before Ushinosuke looked up and saw them. He gasped slightly,
and Iori turned around and grinned. Then they redoubled their efforts.
       "I've got it," cried Ushinosuke, pulling up a long potato and laying it on the
ground.
       Seeing Iori's arm sunk in the hole up to his shoulder, Gonnosuke said
impatiently, "If you don't finish soon, I'm going on by myself."
       Placing his hand on his hip like an aged farmer, Iori forced himself to a
standing position and said, "I can't do it. It'd take me the rest of the day." With a
look of resignation, he brushed the dirt off his kimono.
       "You can't get the potato out after you've dug that far?" asked Ushinosuke.
"Here, I'll pull it out for you."
       "No," said Iori, pulling back Ushinosuke's hand. "It'll break." He gently
pushed the dirt back in the hole and packed it down.
       "Bye," called Ushinosuke, proudly shouldering his potato and accidentally
revealing that the tip was broken off.
       Seeing that, Hyōgo said, "You lost. You may have won the fight, but you're
disqualified from the potato-digging contest."
