A Pear Blossom


       In the dark, solemn forest of cryptomerias, the voices of the lowly shrike,
mingling with those of the celestial bulbul, sounded like the jeweled tones of the
mythical Kalavinka bird.
       Two men, coming down from the top of Mount Kōya, where they had
visited the halls and pagodas of the Kongōbuji and paid their respects at the
inner shrine, stopped on a small arched bridge between the inner and outer
temple precincts.
       "Nuinosuke," said the older man pensively, "the world is indeed fragile
and impermanent, isn't it?" From his heavy homespun cloak and utilitarian
hakama, he might have been taken for a country samurai, were it not for his
swords, which were of outstanding quality, and the fact that his companion was
far too suave and well-groomed for a provincial samurai's attendant.
       "You saw them, didn't you?" he continued. "The graves of Oda Nobunaga,
Akechi Mitsuhide, Ishida Mitsunari, Kobayakawa Kingo—all brilliant, famous
generals only a few years ago. And over there, those moss-covered stones mark
the burial places of great members of the Minamoto and Taira clans."
      "Friend and foe ... all together here, aren't they?"
      "All of them nothing more than lonely stones. Were names like Uesugi and
      Takeda really great, or were we only dreaming?"
      "It gives me an odd feeling. Somehow it seems the world we live in is
      unreal."
      "Is it that? Or is it this place that's unreal?"
      "Umm. Who knows?"
      "Who do you suppose thought of calling this the Bridge of Illusions?" "It's a
      well-chosen name, isn't it?"
       "I think illusion is truth, just as enlightenment is reality. If illusion were
unreal, the world couldn't exist. A samurai who devotes his life to his master
cannot—not for an instant—allow himself to be nihilistic. That's why the Zen I
practice is living Zen. It's the Zen of the tainted world, the Zen of hell. A samurai
who trembles at the thought of impermanence or despises the world cannot
perform his duties.... Enough of this place. Let's go back to the other world."
       He walked quickly, with a remarkably firm step for a man of his age.

       Catching sight of priests from the Seiganji, he frowned and grumbled,
"Why did they have to do that?" He'd stayed at the temple the night before; now
about twenty young priests were lined up along the pathway, waiting to see him
off, though he had said his farewells that mornings with the intention of avoiding
a display of this sort.
       He ran the gauntlet, saying polite good-byes, and hurried on down the road
overlooking the patchwork of valleys known as Kujūkutani. Only when he
regained the ordinary world did he relax. Conscious as he was of his own fallible
human heart, the odor of this world came as relief.
       "Hello, who are you?" The question came at him like a shot as they
rounded a bend in the road.
       "Who are you?" asked Nuinosuke.
       The well-built, light-complexioned samurai standing in the middle of the
road said politely, "Forgive me if I'm mistaken, but aren't you Lord Hosokawa
Tadatoshi's senior retainer, Nagaoka Sado?"
       "I'm Nagaoka, to be sure. Who are you, and how did you know I was in
the vicinity?"
       "My name is Daisuke. I'm the only son of Gessō, who lives in retirement
on Mount Kudo."
       Seeing the name did not ring a bell, Daisuke said, "My father has long
since discarded his former name, but until the Battle of Sekigahara he was
known as Sanada Saemonnosuke."
       "Do you mean Sanada Yukimura?"
       "Yes, sir." With a bashfulness seemingly at odds with his appearance,
Daisuke said, "A priest from the Seiganji dropped in at my father's house this
morning. He said you'd come to Mount Kōya for a short visit. Though we heard
you were traveling incognito, my father thought it'd be a pity not to invite you to
have a cup of tea with him."
       "That's very kind of him," replied Sado. He squinted for a minute, then
said to Nuinosuke, "I think we ought to accept, don't you?"
       "Yes, sir," replied Nuinosuke without enthusiasm.
       Daisuke said, "It's still fairly early in the day, but my father would be
honored if you'd spend the night with us."
       Sado hesitated a moment, wondering if it was wise to accept the
hospitality of a man regarded as an enemy of the Tokugawas, then nodded and
said, "We can decide about that later, but I'll be delighted to join your father for a
cup of tea. Don't you agree, Nuinosuke?"

       "Yes, sir."
       Nuinosuke seemed a bit on edge, but as they started down the road behind
Daisuke, master and attendant exchanged knowing glances.
       From the village of Mount Kudo, they climbed a little farther up the
mountain to a residence set apart from the other houses. The enclosure,
surrounded by a low stone wall topped by a fence of woven grass, resembled the
semi-fortified house of a lesser provincial warlord, but all in all one got the
impression of refinement rather than military preparedness.
       "My father's over there, by that thatched building," said Daisuke as they
went through the gate.
       There was a small vegetable garden, sufficient to provide onions and
greens for the morning and evening soup. The main house stood in front of a
cliff; near the side veranda was a bamboo grove, beyond which two more houses
were just visible.
       Nuinosuke knelt on the veranda outside the room Sado was shown to.
Sado sat down and remarked, "It's very quiet here."
       A few minutes later, a young woman who appeared to be Daisuke's wife
quietly served tea and left.
       While Sado waited for his host, he took in the view—the garden and the
valley. Below was the village, and in the distance the inn town of Kamuro. Tiny
flowers bloomed on the moss clinging to the overhanging thatched roof, and
there was the pleasant fragrance of a rare incense. Though he could not see it, he
could hear the stream running through the bamboo grove.
       The room itself evoked a feeling of quiet elegance, a gentle reminder that
the owner of this unpretentious dwelling was the second son of Sanada
Masayuki, lord of Ueda Castle and recipient of an income of 190,000 bushels.
       The posts and beams were thin, the ceiling low. The wall behind the small,
rustic alcove was of roughly finished red clay. The flower arrangement in the
alcove consisted of a single sprig of pear blossoms in a slender yellow and light
green ceramic vase. Sado thought of Po Chü-i's "solitary pear blossom bathed by
the spring rain" and of the love that united the Chinese emperor and Yang Kuei-
fei, as described in the Chang He Ke. He seemed to hear a voiceless sob.
       His eye moved to the hanging scroll above the flower arrangement. The
characters, large and naive, spelled out "Hōkoku Daimyōjin," the name
Hideyoshi was given when he was elevated to the rank of a god after his death.
To one side, a notation in much smaller characters said that this was the work of
Hideyoshi's son Hideyori at the age of eight. Feeling it discourteous to

Hideyoshi's memory to have his back turned to the scroll, Sado shifted a little to
the side. As he did so, he realized suddenly that the pleasant smell came not
from incense burning right then but from the walls and shoji, which must have
absorbed the fragrance when incense was placed there morning and evening to
purify the room in Hideyoshi's honor. Presumably an offering of sake was also
made daily, as to established Shinto deities.
       "Ah," he thought, "Yukimura's as devoted to Hideyoshi as they say." What
he could not fathom was why Yukimura did not hide the scroll. He had the
reputation of being an unpredictable man, a man of the shadows, lurking and
waiting for a propitious moment to return to the center of the country's affairs. It
took no stretch of the imagination to conceive of guests later reporting his
sentiments to the Tokugawa government.
       Footsteps approached along the outside corridor. The small, thin man who
entered the room wore a sleeveless cloak, with only a short sword in the front of
his obi. There was an air of modesty about him.
       Dropping to his knees and bowing to the floor, Yukimura said, "Forgive
me for sending my son to bring you and for interrupting your journey."
       This show of humility made Sado uncomfortable. From the legal
viewpoint, Yukimura had given up his status. He was now only a rōnin who had
taken the Buddhist name Denshin Gessō. Nevertheless, he was the son of Sanada
Masayuki, and his older brother, Nobuyuki, was a daimyō and had close
connections with the Tokugawas. Being only a retainer, Sado was of much lower
rank.
       "You shouldn't bow to me that way," he said, returning the greeting. "It's
an unexpected honor and pleasure to meet you again. I'm glad to see you're in
good health."
       "You seem to be too," replied Yukimura, relaxing while Sado was still
bowing. "I'm pleased to hear Lord Tadatoshi has returned to Buzen safely."
       "Thank you. This is the third year since Lord Yūsai passed away, so he
thought it was time."
       "Has it been that long?"
       "Yes. I've been in Buzen myself, though I have no idea what use Lord
Tadatoshi might have for a relic like myself. I served his father and grandfather
too, as you know."
       When the formalities were over and they began talking of this and that,
Yukimura asked, "Have you seen our Zen master recently?"
       "No, I've seen or heard nothing of Gudō for some time. That reminds me,

it was in his meditation room that I first saw you. You were only a boy then, and
you were with your father." Sado smiled happily as he reminisced about the time
he had been put in charge of constructing the Shumpoin, a building the
Hosokawas had donated to the Myōshinji.
       "A lot of hellions came to Gudō to get the rough edges smoothed off," said
Yukimura. "He accepted them all, not caring whether they were old or young,
daimyō or rōnin."
       "Actually, I think he particularly liked young rōnin," mused Sado. "He
used to say that a true rōnin did not seek fame or profit, did not curry favor with
the powerful, did not attempt to use political power for his own ends, did not
exempt himself from moral judgments. Rather he was as broad-minded as
floating clouds, as quick to act as the rain and quite content in the midst of
poverty. He never set himself any targets and never harbored any grudges."
       "You remember that after all these years?" asked Yukimura.
       Sado nodded ever so slightly. "He also maintained that a true samurai was
as hard to find as a pearl in the vast blue sea. The buried bones of the
innumerable rōnin who sacrificed their lives for the good of the country he
likened to pillars supporting the nation." Sado looked straight into Yukimura's
eyes as he said this, but the latter did not seem to notice the allusion to men of
his own adopted status.
       "That reminds me," he said. "One of the rōnin who sat at Gudō's feet in
those days was a young man from Mimasaka named Miyamoto ..." "Miyamoto
Musashi?"
       "That's it, Musashi. He impressed me as being a man of great depth, even
though he was only about twenty at the time, and his kimono was always filthy."
      "It must be the same man."
      "Then you do remember him?"
      "No; I didn't hear of him until recently, when I was in Edo."
       "He's a man to watch. Gudō said that his approach to Zen was promising,
so I kept an eye on him. Then he suddenly disappeared. A year or two later, I
heard he'd won a brilliant victory against the House of Yoshioka. I remember
thinking at the time that Gudō must have a very good eye for people."
       "I came across him quite by accident. He was in Shimōsa and gave some
villagers a lesson in how to protect themselves from bandits. Later he helped
them turn a tract of wasteland into paddy."
       "I think he may be the true rōnin Gudō had in mind—the pearl in the vast
blue sea."

       "Do you really think so? I recommended him to Lord Tadatoshi, but I'm
afraid finding him is as hard as discovering a pearl. One thing you can be sure
of. If a samurai like that took an official position, it wouldn't be for the sake of
the income. He'd be concerned with how his work measured up to his ideals. It
may be that Musashi would prefer Mount Kudo to the House of Hosokawa."
       "What?"
       Sado brushed off his remark with a short laugh, as if it were a slip of the
tongue.
       "You're joking, of course," said Yukimura. "In my present circumstances, I
can hardly afford to hire a servant, let alone a well-known rōnin. I doubt whether
Musashi would come even if I did invite him."
       "There's no need to deny it," said Sado. "It's no secret the Hosokawas are
on the side of the Tokugawas. And everybody knows you are the support on
which Hideyori leans most heavily. Looking at the scroll in the alcove, I was
impressed by your loyalty."
       Seemingly offended, Yukimura said, "The scroll was given to me by a
certain person at Osaka Castle in lieu of a memorial portrait of Hideyoshi. I try
to take good care of it. But Hideyoshi is dead." He swallowed and went on.
"Times change, of course. It doesn't take an expert to see that Osaka has fallen
on bad days, while the power of the Tokugawas continues to grow. But I'm not
able by nature to change my loyalty and serve a second lord."
       "I wonder if people will believe it's that simple. If I may speak candidly,
everybody says Hideyori and his mother furnish you great sums every year and
at a wave of the hand you could muster five or six thousand rōnin."
       Yukimura laughed deprecatingly. "Not a word of truth in it. I tell you,
Sado, there's nothing worse than having people make you out to be more than
you are."
       "You can't blame them. You went to Hideyoshi when you were young, and
he liked you better than anyone else. I understand your father's been heard to say
you're the Kusunoki Masashige or the K'ung-ming of our times."
       "You embarrass me."
       "Isn't it true?"
       "I want to spend the rest of my days here, quietly, in the shadow of the
mountain where the Buddha's Law is preserved. That's all. I'm not a man of
refinement. It's enough for me if I can expand my fields a little, live to see my
son's child born, have freshly made buckwheat noodles in the fall, eat fresh
greens in the spring. Beyond that, I'd like to live a long life, far removed from

wars or rumors of war."
       "Is that really all there is to it?" Sado asked mildly.
       "Laugh if you will, but I've been spending my free time reading Lao-tsu
and Chuang-tsu. The conclusion I've come to is that life is enjoyment. Without
enjoyment, what use is there in living?"
      "Well, well," exclaimed Sado, feigning surprise.
      They talked for another hour or so, over cups of fresh tea served by
      Daisuke's wife.
      Eventually Sado said, "I fear I've stayed too long, wasting your time with
      my chatter. Nuinosuke, shall we be going?"
       "Don't hurry off," said Yukimura. "My son and his wife have made some
noodles. Poor country food, but I wish you'd have some with us. If you're
planning to stop over at Kamuro, you have plenty of time."
       Daisuke appeared just then to ask his father if he was ready to have the
meal served. Yukimura stood up and led the way down a corridor to the back
part of the house.
       When they were seated, Daisuke offered Sado a pair of chopsticks, saying,
"I'm afraid the food isn't too good, but try some anyway."
       His wife, not accustomed to having strangers around, diffidently held out a
sake cup, which Sado politely refused. Daisuke and his wife lingered a moment
longer before excusing themselves.
       "What's that noise I can hear?" asked Sado. It sounded rather like a loom,
though louder and with a slightly different quality.
       "Oh, that? It's a wooden wheel for making cord. I'm sorry to say, I've had
to put the family and servants to work braiding cord, which we sell to help with
the finances." Then he added, "We're all used to it, but I suppose it might be
annoying to anyone who's not. I'll send word to have it stopped."
       "No, that's all right. It doesn't bother me. I'd hate to think I was holding up
your work."
       As he started to eat, Sado thought about the food, which sometimes
provides insight into a man's condition. But he found nothing revealing there.
Yukimura was not at all like the young samurai he had known years before, but
he seemed to have shrouded his present circumstances in ambiguity.
       Sado then thought about the sounds he heard—kitchen noises, people
coming and going, and a couple of times the clink of money being counted. The
dispossessed daimyō were not accustomed to physical labor, and sooner or later
they would run out of treasures to sell. It was conceivable that Osaka Castle had

ceased to be a source of funds. Still, the idea of Yukimura in tight straits was
oddly disturbing.
       He had been aware that his host might be trying to piece together bits of
conversation to form a picture of how things were going with the House of
Hosokawa, but there was no indication of this. What stood out about his
recollections of their meeting was that Yukimura had not asked about his visit to
Mount Kōya. Sado would have answered readily, for there was nothing
mysterious about it. Many years ago, Hosokawa Yūsai had been sent by
Hideyoshi to the Seiganji and had stayed for quite some time. He had left behind
books, some writings and some personal effects, which had become important
keepsakes. Sado had gone through them, sorted them out and arranged for the
temple to turn them over to Tadatoshi.
       Nuinosuke, who hadn't moved from the veranda, cast an anxious look
toward the back of the house. Relations between Edo and Osaka were strained,
to say the least. Why was Sado taking a risk like this? He didn't imagine Sado to
be in any immediate danger, but he'd heard that the lord of Kii Province, Asano
Nagaakira, had instructions to keep a strict watch on Mount Kudo. If one of
Asano's men reported that Sado had paid a secret visit to Yukimura, the
shogunate would become suspicious of the House of Hosokawa.
       "Now's my chance," he thought, as the wind suddenly swept through the
forsythia and kerria blossoms in the garden. Black clouds were forming rapidly,
and it began to sprinkle.
       He hurried down the corridor and announced, "It's starting to rain, sir. If
we're going to leave, I think now is the time."
       Grateful for the opportunity to break away, Sado stood up immediately.
"Thank you, Nuinosuke," he said. "By all means, let's be on our way."
       Yukimura refrained from urging Sado to stay overnight. He called Daisuke
and his wife and said, "Give our guests some straw rain capes. And you,
Daisuke, go with them to Kamuro."
       At the gate, after expressing thanks for Yukimura's hospitality, Sado said,
"I'm sure we'll meet again one of these days. Maybe it'll be another day of rain,
or maybe there'll be a strong wind blowing. Until then, I wish you the best of
health."
       Yukimura grinned and nodded. Yes, one of these days ... For an instant
each man saw the other in his mind's eye, mounted on horseback and carrying a
lance. But for the present there was only the host bowing amidst falling apricot
petals and the departing guest in a straw cape streaked with rain.

       As they walked slowly down the road, Daisuke said, "It won't rain much.
At this time of year, we have a little shower like this every day."
       Still, the clouds above Senjō Valley and the peaks of Kōya looked
threatening, and they unconsciously quickened their pace.
       Entering Kamuro, they were greeted by the sight of a man sharing the back
of a horse with bundles of firewood and tied so tightly he couldn't move.
Leading the horse was a white-robed priest, who called Daisuke's name and ran
toward him. Daisuke pretended not to notice.
       "Someone's calling you," said Sado, exchanging glances with Nuinosuke.
Forced to take notice of the priest, Daisuke said, "Oh, Rinshōbō. Sorry, I didn't
see you."
       "I've come straight from Kiimi Pass," said the priest in a loud, excited
voice. "The man from Edo—the one we were told to watch for—I spotted him in
Nara. He put up quite a fight, but we took him alive. Now, if we take him to
Gessō and force him to talk, we'll find out—"
       "'What are you talking about?" broke in Daisuke.
       "The man on the horse. He's a spy from Edo."
       "Can't you shut up, you fool!" hissed Daisuke. "Do you know who the man
with me is? Nagaoka Sado of the House of Hosokawa. We rarely have the
privilege of seeing him, and I'll not have you disturbing us with your silly joke."
       Rinshōbō's eyes, turning to the two travelers, betrayed his shock, and he
barely caught himself before blurting out, "House of Hosokawa?"
       Sado and Nuinosuke were trying to look poised and indifferent, but the
wind whipped at their rain capes, making them flap out like the wings of a crane
and rather spoiling their efforts.
       "Why?" asked Rinshōbō in a low voice.
       Daisuke drew him a little to one side and spoke in a whisper. When he
returned to his guests, Sado said, "Why don't you go back now? I'd hate to put
you to any more trouble."
       After watching them until they were out of sight, Daisuke said to the
priest, "How could you be so stupid? Don't you know enough to open your eyes
before you open your mouth? My father wouldn't be pleased to hear about this."
       "Yes, sir. I'm sorry. I didn't know."
       Despite his robes, the man was no priest. He was Toriumi Benzō, one of
Yukimura's leading retainers.
