The Runaway Ox


        The shadow of the plum branch cast on the white plaster wall by the pallid
sun was beautiful in a restrained way evocative of monochrome ink painting. It
was early spring in Koyagyū, and quiet, the branches of the plum trees
seemingly beckoning southward to the nightingales that would soon flock to the
valley.
        Unlike the birds, the shugyōsha who presented themselves at the castle
gate knew no season. They came in a constant stream, seeking either to receive
instruction from Sekishūsai or to try their hand against him. The litany varied
little: "Please, just one bout"; "I beg you, let me see him"; "I'm the only true
disciple of so-and-so, who teaches at such-and-such a place." For the past ten
years, the guards had been giving the same reply: because of their master's
advanced age, he was unable to receive anyone. Few swordsmen, or would-be
swordsmen, would let it go at that. Some launched diatribes on the meaning of
the true Way and how there should be no discrimination between young and old,
rich and poor, beginner and expert. Others simply pleaded, while still others
rashly tried to offer bribes. Many went away muttering angry imprecations.
        Had the truth been generally known, namely that Sekishūsai had passed
away late the previous year, matters might have been greatly simplified. But it
had been decided that since Munenori couldn't get away from Edo until the
fourth month, the death should be kept secret until the funeral service had been
held. One of the handful of people outside the castle who knew the
circumstances now sat in a guest room asking rather insistently to see Hyōgo.
        It was Inshun, the elderly abbot of the Hōzōin, who throughout In'ei's
dotage and after his death had upheld the temple's reputation as a martial arts
center. Many even believed he had improved it. He had done everything possible
to maintain the close ties between the temple and Koyagyū that had existed since
the days of In'ei and Sekishūsai. He wanted to see Hyōgo, he said, because he
wanted to have a talk about the martial arts. Sukekurō knew what he really
wanted—to have a bout with the man whom his grandfather had privately
regarded as a better swordsman than either himself or Munenori. Hyōgo, of
course, would have no part in such a match, since he thought it would benefit
neither side and was therefore senseless.

      Sukekurō assured Inshun that word had been sent. "I'm sure Hyōgo would
      come to greet you if he were feeling better."
      "So you mean to say he still has a cold?"
      "Yes; he can't seem to get rid of it."
      "I didn't know his health was so frail."
       "Oh, it isn't really, but he's been in Edo for some time, you know, and he
can't quite get used to these cold mountain winters."
       While the two men chatted, a servant boy was calling Otsū’s name in the
garden of the innermost encirclement. A shoji opened, and she emerged from
one of the houses, trailing a wisp of incense smoke. She was still in mourning
more than a hundred days since Sekishūsai's passing, and her face looked as
white as a pear blossom.
      "Where've you been? I've been looking everywhere," asked the boy. "I've
      been in the Buddhist chapel."
      "Hyōgo's asking for you."
      When she entered Hyōgo's room, he said, "Ah, Otsū, thank you for coming.
      I'd like you to greet a visitor for me."
      "Yes, of course."
       "He's been here quite a while. Sukekurō went to keep him company, but
listening to him go on and on about the Art of War must have Sukekurō pretty
exhausted by now."
      "The abbot of the Hōzōin?"
      "Um."
      Otsū smiled faintly, bowed and left the room.


      Meanwhile, Inshun was not too subtly feeling Sukekurō out regarding
Hyōgo's past and character.
      "I'm told that when Katō Kiyomasa offered him a position, Sekishūsai
refused to consent unless Kiyomasa agreed to an unusual condition."
      "Really? I don't recall ever hearing of any such thing."
      "According to In'ei, Sekishūsai told Kiyomasa that since Hyōgo was
extremely quick-tempered, his lordship would have to promise in advance that if
Hyōgo committed any capital offenses, he would pardon the first three.
Sekishūsai was never known to condone impetuosity. He must have had rather a
special feeling about Hyōgo."
      This came as such a surprise that Sukekurō was still at a loss for words

when Otsū entered. She smiled at the abbot and said, "How good to see you
again. Unfortunately, Hyōgo is tied up preparing a report which must be sent to
Edo immediately, but he asked me to convey his apologies at not being able to
see you this time." She busied herself serving tea and cakes to Inshun and the
two young priests attending him.
       The abbot looked disappointed, though he politely ignored the discrepancy
between Sukekurō's excuse and Otsū's. "I'm sorry to hear that. I had some
important information for him."
       "I'll be happy to pass it on," said Sukekurō, "and you can rest assured
Hyōgo's ears alone will hear it."
       "Oh, I'm sure of that," said the old priest. "I just wanted to warn Hyōgo in
person."
       Inshun then repeated a rumor he'd heard about some samurai from Ueno
Castle in Iga Province. The dividing line between Koyagyū and the castle lay in
a sparsely inhabited area about two miles to the east, and ever since Ieyasu had
confiscated it from the Christian daimyō Tsutsui Sadatsugu and reassigned it to
Tōdō Takatora, many changes had been taking place. Takatora had, since taking
up residence the previous year, repaired the castle, revised the tax system,
improved the irrigation facilities and carried out other measures to consolidate
his holdings. All this was common knowledge. What In-shun had got wind of
was that Takatora was in the process of trying to expand his lands by pushing
back the boundary line.
       According to the reports, Takatora had dispatched a number of samurai to
Tsukigase, where they were building houses, cutting down plum trees, waylaying
travelers and openly trespassing on Lord Yagyū's property.
       "It could be," observed Inshun, "Lord Takatora is taking advantage of your
being in mourning. You may think I'm an alarmist, but it looks as though he's
planning to push the boundary back in this direction and put up a new fence. If
he is, it'd be a lot easier to attend to things now than after he's finished. If you sit
back and do nothing, you'll regret it later, I'm afraid."
       Speaking as one of the senior retainers, Sukekurō thanked Inshun for the
information. "I'll have the situation investigated, and lodge a complaint if one is
warranted." Expressing thanks on behalf of Hyōgo, Sukekurō bowed as the
abbot took his leave.
       When Sukekurō went to inform Hyōgo of the rumors, Hyōgo just laughed.
"Let it be," he said. "When my uncle gets back, he can look into it."
       Sukekurō, who knew the importance of guarding every foot of land, wasn't

quite satisfied with Hyōgo's attitude. He conferred with the other ranking
samurai and together they agreed that, though discretion was called for,
something should be done. Tōdō Takatora was one of the most powerful daimyō
in the country.


       The following morning, as Sukekurō was leaving the dōjō above the
Shinkagedō after sword practice, he ran into a boy of thirteen or fourteen.
       The lad bowed to Sukekurō, who said jovially, "Hello there, Ushinosuke.
Peeking into the dōjō again? Did you bring me a present? Let's see ... wild
potatoes?" He was only half teasing, since Ushinosuke's potatoes were always
better than anyone else's. The boy lived with his mother in the isolated mountain
village of Araki and often came to the castle to sell charcoal, boar meat and other
things.
      "No potatoes today, but I brought this for Otsū." He held up a package
      wrapped in straw.
      "What's that, now—rhubarb?"
      "No, it's alive! In Tsukigase, I sometimes hear nightingales singing. I caught
      one!"
      "Hmm, you always come by way of Tsukigase, don't you?"
      "That's right. That's the only road."
      "Let me ask you a question. Have you seen a lot of samurai in that area
      lately?"
      "Some."
      "What are they doing there?"
      "Building cabins . . ."
      "Have you seen them putting up fences, anything like that?"
      "No."
      "Have they been cutting down plum trees?"
       "Well, besides the cabins, they've been fixing bridges, so they've been
cutting down all kinds of trees. For firewood too."
       "Are they stopping people on the road?"
       "I don't think so. I haven't seen them do that."
       Sukekurō cocked his head. "I've heard those samurai are from Lord Tōdō's
fief, but I don't know what they're doing in Tsukigase. What do people in your
village say?"
       "They say they're rōnin chased out of Nara and Uji. They didn't have

anyplace to live, so they came to the mountains."
      Despite what Inshun had said, Sukekurō thought this a not unreasonable
explanation. Ōkubo Nagayasu, the magistrate of Nara, had not relaxed his efforts
to keep his jurisdiction free of indigent rōnin.
      "Where's Otsū?" asked Ushinosuke. "I want to give her her present." He
always looked forward to seeing her, but not just because she gave him sweets
and said nice things to him. There was something about her beauty that was
mysterious, otherworldly. At times, he couldn't decide whether she was human
or a goddess.
      "She's in the castle, I imagine," said Sukekurō. Then, looking toward the
garden, he said, "Oh, you seem to be in luck. Isn't that her over there?" "Otsū!"
Ushinosuke called loudly.
      She turned and smiled. Running breathlessly to her side, he held up his
package.
      "Look! I caught a nightingale. It's for you."
      "A nightingale?" Frowning, she kept her hands close to her sides.
Ushinosuke looked disappointed. "It has a beautiful voice," he said. "Wouldn't
you like to hear it?"
     "I would, but only if it's free to fly wherever it wants to. Then it'll sing
     pretty songs for us."
     "I guess you're right," he said with a little pout. "Do you want me to turn it
     loose?"
     "I appreciate your wanting to give me a present, but yes, that'd make me
     happier than keeping it."
     Silently, Ushinosuke split open the straw package, and like an arrow the
     bird flew away over the castle wall.
     "There, you see how glad it is to be free?" said Otsū.
     "They call nightingales harbingers of spring, don't they? Maybe
     somebody'll bring you good news."
     "A messenger bringing news as welcome as the coming of spring? It's true
     there's something I'm longing to hear."
     As Otsū started walking toward the woods and bamboo grove in back of the
     castle, Ushinosuke fell in at her side.
     "Where are you going?" he asked.
     "I've been inside a lot lately. I thought I'd go up the hill and look at the plum
     blossoms for a change."
     "Plum blossoms? Those up there aren't much to look at. You should go to

      Tsukigase."
      "That might be nice. Is it far?"
      "A couple of miles or so. Why don't you go? I brought firewood today, so I
      have the ox with me."
       Having scarcely been outside the castle all winter, Otsū made up her mind
quickly. Without telling anyone where she was going, the two of them strolled
down to the back gate, which was used by tradesmen and others having business
at the castle. It was guarded by a samurai armed with a lance. He nodded and
smiled at Otsū. Ushinosuke, too, was a familiar figure, and he let them out the
gate without checking the boy's written permission to be in the castle grounds.
       People in the fields and on the road spoke a friendly greeting to Otsū,
whether they knew her or not. When the dwellings became sparser, she looked
back at the white castle nestled on the skirt of the mountain and said, "Can I get
back home while it's still light?"
      "Sure, but I'll come back with you anyway."
      "Araki Village is beyond Tsukigase, isn't it?"
      "It doesn't matter."
       Chatting about various things, they passed a salt shop, where a man was
bartering some boar meat for a sack of salt. He finished his transaction, came out
and walked along the road behind them. With the snow melting, the road grew
worse and worse. There were few travelers.
      "Ushinosuke," said Otsū, "you always come to Koyagyū, don’t you?"
      "Yes."
      "Isn’t Ueno Castle closer to Araki Village?"
      "It is, but there’s no great swordsman like Lord Yagyū at Ueno Castle."
      "Do you like swords?”
      "Uh-huh."
       He stopped the ox, let go of the rope and ran down to the edge of the
stream. There was a bridge from which a log had fallen. He put it back in place
and waited for the man behind them to cross first.
       The man looked like a rōnin. As he walked by Otsū, he eyed her brazenly,
then glanced back several times from the bridge and from the other side, before
disappearing into a fold of the mountain.
      "Who do you suppose that is?" asked Otsū nervously.
      "Did he frighten you?"
      "No, but . . ."
      "There're lots of rōnin in the mountains around here."

      "Are there?" she said uneasily.
       Over his shoulder, Ushinosuke said, "Otsū, I wonder if you'd help me. Do
you think you could ask Master Kimura to hire me? I mean, you know, I could
sweep the garden, draw water—do things like that."
       It was only recently that the boy had received special permission from
Sukekurō to enter the dōjō and watch the men at practice, but already he had
only one ambition. His ancestors bore the surname Kikumura; the head of the
family for several generations had used the given name Mataemon. Ushinosuke
had decided that when he became a samurai he would take the name Mataemon,
but none of the Kikumuras had done anything of particular note. He'd change his
surname to that of his village, and if his dream came true, become famous far
and wide as Araki Mataemon.
       As Otsū listened, she thought of Jōtarō and was seized by a sense of
loneliness. She was twenty-five now; he must be nineteen or twenty. Looking
around at the plum blossoms—not yet in full bloom—she couldn't help but feel
that spring had already passed for her.
      "Let's go back, Ushinosuke," she said suddenly.
      He gave her a questioning look but obediently turned the ox around. "Stop!"
      shouted a loud male voice.
      Two other rōnin had joined the one from the salt shop. All three came and
      stood around the ox with their arms folded.
      "What do you want?" asked Ushinosuke.
      The men kept their eyes fixed on Otsū.
      "I see what you mean," said one.
      "She's a beauty, isn't she?"
       "I've seen her somewhere before," said the third man. "In Kyoto, I think."
"She must be from Kyoto, certainly not from any of the villages around here."
      "I don't remember whether it was at the Yoshioka School or somewhere
      else, but I know I've seen her."
      "Were you at the Yoshioka School?"
      "For three years, after Sekigahara."
       "If you've got any business with us, say what it is!" Ushinosuke said
angrily. "We want to get back before dark."
       One of the rōnin glared at him, as if noticing him for the first time. "You're
from Araki, aren't you? One of the charcoal-makers?"
      "Yes. So what?"
      "We don't need you. Run along home."

      "That's just what I'm going to do."
      He pulled the rope taut, and one man gave him a look that would have had
      most boys trembling with fright.
      "Get out of the way," said Ushinosuke.
      "This lady's going with us."
      "Going where?"
      "What difference does it make to you? Give me that rope."
      "No!"
      "Say, he doesn't think I mean it."
       The other two men, squaring their shoulders and glowering, moved in on
Ushinosuke. One presented a fist as hard as a pine knot in front of his chin.
       Otsū clutched the ox's back. The tilt of Ushinosuke's eyebrows said very
clearly something was going to happen.
       "Oh, no, stop!" she cried, hoping to keep the boy from doing anything
rash.
       But the plaintive note in her voice just spurred him to action. He lashed out
swiftly with one leg, caught the man in front of him, sending him staggering
backward. No sooner was Ushinosuke's foot in contact with the ground again
than he rammed his head into the gut of the man on his left. Simultaneously he
got a grip on the man's sward and pulled it from its scabbard. Then he began
swinging.
       He moved with lightning quickness. He whirled and seemed to be
attacking in every direction at the same time, all three opponents at once, with
equal force. Whether he was acting brilliantly out of instinct or out of childish
recklessness, his unorthodox tactics took the rōnin by surprise.
       The reverse swing of the sword drove forcefully into the chest of one man.
Otsū cried out, but her voice was drowned by the scream of the wounded man.
He fell toward the ox, a geyser of blood spurting into the animal's face. Terrified,
the ox let out an indescribable shriek. Just then, Ushinosuke's sword cut deeply
into its rump. With another shriek, the ox set off at a near gallop.
       The other two rōnin rushed at Ushinosuke, who was leaping nimbly from
rock to rock in the stream bed. "I didn't do anything wrong! It was you!" he
shouted.
       Realizing he was out of their reach, the two rōnin started after the ox.
Ushinosuke jumped back onto the road and took after them, shouting, "Running
away? You running away?"
      One man stopped and half turned.

      "You little bastard!"
      "Leave him till later!" shouted the other man.
       The ox, blind with fear, left the valley road and ran up a low hill, traveled a
short distance along the crest and plunged down the other side. In a very short
time, it covered a considerable distance, reaching a point not far from the Yagyū
fief.
       Otsū, her eyes shut in resignation, managed to keep from being thrown by
clinging to the packsaddle. She could hear the voices of the people they were
passing but was too stunned to utter a cry for help. Not that it would have done
any good. None of the people commenting on the spectacle had the courage to
stop the demented beast.
       When they were almost to Hannya Plain, a man came from a side road into
the middle of the main road, which, though very narrow, was the Kasagi
highroad. He had a letter case slung from his shoulder and appeared to be a
servant of some sort.
      People were shouting, "Watch out! Get out of the way!" but he walked on,
      right in the path of the ox.
      Then there was a terrible cracking sound.
      "He's been gored!"
      "The idiot!"
       But it wasn't as the bystanders first thought. The sound they'd heard was
not that of the ox striking the man but of the man landing a stunning blow on the
side of the animal's head. The ox lifted its heavy neck sideways, turned halfway
around and started back the other way. It hadn't gone ten feet before it came to a
dead halt, saliva streaming from its mouth, its whole body shaking.
       "Get down quick," the man said to Otsū.
       Onlookers crowded around excitedly, staring at the man's foot, which was
firmly planted on the rope.
       Once she was safely on the ground, Otsū bowed to her rescuer, though she
was still too dazed to know where she was or what she was doing.
       "Why should a gentle animal like this go mad?" asked the man, as he led
the ox to the side of the road and tied it to a tree. Catching sight of the blood on
the animal's legs, he said, "What's this, now. Why, it's been cut—with a sword!"
       While he was examining the wound and muttering to himself, Kimura
Sukekurō pushed through the ring of people and sent them on their way.
       "Aren't you Abbot Inshun's attendant?" he asked, even before he'd had a
chance to catch his breath.

       "How fortunate to meet you here, sir. I have a letter for you from the
abbot. If you don't mind, I'd like to ask you to read it immediately." He took the
letter from the case and handed it to Sukekurō.
       "For me?" Sukekurō asked with surprise. Having ascertained there was no
mistake, he opened it and read: "Regarding the samurai at Tsukigase, I have,
since our conversation yesterday, verified that they are not Lord Tōdō's men.
They are riffraff, rōnin expelled from the cities, who have holed up there for the
winter. I hasten to inform you of this unfortunate error on my part."
       "Thank you," said Sukekurō. "This agrees with what I've learned from
another source. Tell the abbot I am much relieved and trust that he is too."
      "Forgive me for delivering the letter in the middle of the road. I'll convey
      your message to the abbot. Good-bye."
      "Wait a minute. How long have you been at the Hōzōin?"
      "Not long."
      "What's your name?"
      "I'm called Torazō."
      "I wonder," mumbled Sukekurō, scrutinizing the man's face. "Are you by
      any chance Hamada Toranosuke?"
      "No."
      "I've never met Hamada, but there's a man at the castle who insists
      Hamada's now serving as Inshun's attendant."
      "Yes, sir."
      "Is it a case of mistaken identity?"
       Torazō, red in the face, lowered his voice. "Actually, I am Hamada. I've
come to the Hōzōin for reasons of my own. To avoid further disgrace to my
teacher and greater shame to myself, I'd like to keep my identity secret. If you
don't mind . . ."
       "Don't worry. I had no intention of prying into your affairs."
       "I'm sure you've heard about Tadaaki. His abandoning his school and
retiring to the mountains was due to a mistake of mine. I've given up my status.
Doing menial tasks at the temple will be good discipline. I didn't give the priests
my real name. It's all very embarrassing."
       "The outcome of Tadaaki's fight with Kojirō is no secret. Kojirō told
everyone he met between Edo and Buzen. I take it you've resolved to clear your
teacher's name."
       "One of these days ... I'll see you again, sir." Torazō took his leave swiftly,
as though unable to endure another moment.
