Before the Thirteenth Day


      Shimonoseki, Moji, the castle town of Kokura—during the past several
days many travelers had come but few had left. The inns were all full, and horses
were lined up side by side at the hitching posts outside.
      The command issued by the castle said:


       On the thirteenth day of this month, at eight o'clock in the morning, on
Funashima in the Nagato Straits of Buzen, Sasaki Kojirō Ganryū, a samurai of
this fief, will at his lordship's bidding fight a bout with Miyamoto Musashi
Masana, a rōnin from the province of Mimasaka.
       It is strictly forbidden for supporters of either swordsman to go to his aid
or set forth on the water between the mainland and Funashima. Until ten o'clock
on the morning of the thirteenth, no sightseeing vessels, passenger ships and
fishing boats will be permitted to enter the straits. Fourth month [ 1612].


     The announcement was posted conspicuously on bulletin boards at all
     major intersections, piers and gathering places.
     "The thirteenth? That's the day after tomorrow, isn't it?"
     "People from all over will want to see the bout, so they can go home and
     talk about it."
     "Of course they will, but how's anybody going to see a fight taking place on
     an island two miles from shore?"
      "Well, if you go to the top of Mount Kazashi, you can see the pine trees on
Funashima. People'll come anyway, just to gawk at the boats and crowds in
Buzen and Nagato."
      "I hope the weather stays good."
      Because of the restriction of shipping activities, boatmen who might
otherwise have been turning a tidy profit were doing poorly. Travelers and
townsmen, however, took it in their stride, busily searching out vantage points
from which they might catch a glimpse of the excitement on Funashima.
      About noon on the eleventh, a woman giving breast to her baby was

pacing back and forth in front of a "one-tray" eatery where the road from Moji
entered Kokura.
        The baby, tired from traveling, would not stop crying. "Sleepy? Take a
little nap now. There, there. Sleep, sleep." Akemi patted her foot rhythmically on
the ground. She wore no makeup. With a baby to nurse, her life had changed
considerably, but there was nothing in her present circumstances that she
regretted.
        Matahachi came out of the shop, wearing a sleeveless kimono of subdued
color. The only hint of the days when he had aspired to becoming a priest was
the bandanna on his head, hiding the once shaven head.
        "Oh, my, what's this?" he said. "Still crying? You should be sleeping. Go
on, Akemi. I'll take him while you eat. Eat a lot, so you'll have plenty of milk."
Taking the child in his arms, he began crooning a soft lullaby.
        "Well, this is a surprise!" came a voice from behind him.
        "Huh?" Matahachi stared at the man, unable to place him.
        "I'm Ichinomiya Gempachi. We met several years ago at the pine forest
near Gojō Avenue in Kyoto. I guess you don't remember me." When Matahachi
continued to stare blankly at him, Gempachi said, "You were going around
calling yourself Sasaki Kojirō."
       "Oh!" Matahachi gasped loudly. "The monk with the staff . . ."
       "That's right. Good to see you again."
       Matahachi hastened to bow, which awakened the baby. "Now, let's not start
       crying again," he pleaded.
        "I wonder," said Gempachi, "if you could tell me where Kojirō's house is. I
understand he lives here in Kokura."
        "Sorry, I have no idea. I just got here myself."
        Two samurais' attendants emerged from the shop, and one said to
Gempachi, "If you're looking for Kojirō's house, it's right by the Itatsu River.
We'll show you the way, if you like."
        "Very kind of you. Good-bye, Matahachi. See you again." The samurai
walked off, and Gempachi fell in step with them.
        Matahachi, noticing the dirt and grime clinging to the man's clothes,
thought: "I wonder if he's come all the way from Kōzuke." He was deeply
impressed that news of the bout had spread to such faraway places. Then the
memory of the encounter with Gempachi flowed through his mind, and he
shuddered. How worthless, how shallow, how shameless he'd been in those days!
To think he had actually been brazen enough to try to pass off the certificate

from the Chūjō School as his own, to impersonate ... Still, that he could see how
churlish he had been was a hopeful sign. At least he'd changed since then. "I
suppose," he thought, "even a stupid fool like me can improve if he stays awake
and tries."
       Hearing the baby crying again, Akemi bolted her meal and rushed
outdoors. "Sorry," she said. "I'll take him now."
       Having placed the baby on Akemi's back, Matahachi hung a candy
peddler's box from his shoulder and prepared to forge on. A number of passersby
looked enviously at this poor, but apparently happy, couple.
       An elderly, genteel-looking woman approached and said, "What a lovely
baby! How old is he? Oh, look, he's laughing." As if on command, the
manservant accompanying her stooped and peered at the baby's face.
       They all walked together for a way. Then, as Matahachi and Akemi started
to turn into a side street to look for an inn, the woman said, "Oh, are you going
that way?" She bade them good-bye, and almost as an afterthought, asked, "You
seem to be travelers, too, but would you happen to know where Sasaki Kojirō's
house is?"
       Matahachi imparted the information he had just heard from the two
attendants. As he watched her go off, he mumbled gloomily, "I wonder what my
mother's doing these days." Now that he had a child of his own, he had begun to
appreciate her feelings.
       "Come on, let's go," said Akemi.
       Matahachi stood and stared vacantly at the old woman. She was about the
same age as Osugi.


     Kojirō's house was full of guests.
     "It's a great opportunity for him."
     "Yes, this'll make his reputation, once and for all."
     "He'll be known everywhere."
     "True enough, but we mustn't forget who his opponent is. Ganryū will have
     to be very careful."
      Many had arrived the previous night, and callers spilled out into the great
entrance hall, the side entrances, the outside corridors. Some hailed from Kyoto
or Osaka, others from western Honshu, one from the village of Jōkyōji in distant
Echizen. Since there weren't enough servants in the household, Kakubei had sent
some of his to help out. Samurai who were studying under Kojirō came and

went, their faces eager with anticipation.
       All these friends, all these disciples, had one thing in common: whether
they knew Musashi or not, he was the enemy. Particularly virulent in their hatred
were the provincial samurai who had at one time or another studied the methods
of the Yoshioka School. The humiliation of the defeat at Ichijōji gnawed at their
minds and hearts. Moreover, the single-minded determination with which
Musashi had pursued his career was such that he had made himself many
enemies. Kojirō's students despised him as a matter of course.
       A young samurai led a recent arrival from the entrance hall into the
crowded parlor and announced, "This man has made the trip from Kōzuke."
       The man said, "My name is Ichinomiya Gempachi," and modestly took his
place among them.
       A murmur of admiration and respect went around the room, for Kōzuke
lay a thousand miles to the northeast. Gempachi asked that a talisman he had
brought from Mount Hakuun be placed on the household altar, and there were
more murmurs of approval.
       "The weather will be good on the thirteenth," remarked one man, glancing
out under the eaves at the flaming evening sun. "Today's the eleventh, tomorrow
the twelfth, the next day . . ."
       Addressing Gempachi, one guest said, "I think your coming so far to say a
prayer for Kojirō's success is quite remarkable. Do you have some connection
with him?"
       "I'm a retainer of the House of Kusanagi in Shimonida. My late master,
Kusanagi Tenki, was the nephew of Kanemaki Jisai. Tenki knew Kojirō when
Kojirō was still a young boy."
       "I'd heard Kojirō studied under Jisai."
       "That's true. Kojirō came from the same school as Itō Ittōsai. I've heard
Ittōsai say many times that Kojirō was a brilliant fighter." He went on to recount
how Kojirō had chosen to reject Jisai's certificate and create a style of his own.
He told, too, of how tenacious Kojirō had been, even as a child. Meeting eager
questions with detailed answers, Gempachi talked on and on.
       "Isn't Ganryū Sensei here?" asked a young attendant, picking his way
through the crowd. Not seeing him, he went from room to room. He was
grumbling to himself by the time he came upon Omitsu, who was cleaning
Kojirō's room. "If you're looking for the master," she said, "you'll find him at the
falcon cage."
       Kojirō was inside the cage, looking intently into Amayumi's eyes. He had

fed the bird, brushed off loose feathers, held it for a time on his fist and was now
patting it affectionately.
       "Sensei."
      "Yes?"
      "There's a woman who says she's come from Iwakuni to visit you. She said
      you'd know her when you see her."
      "Hmm. It may be my mother's younger sister."
      "Which room should I show her to?"
      "I don't want to see her. I don't want to see anybody.... Oh, I suppose I have
      to. She is my aunt. Take her to my room."
      The man left and Kojirō called out the door, "Tatsunosuke."
       "Yes, sir." Tatsunosuke came inside the cage and knelt on one knee behind
Kojirō. A student who lived at his house, he was seldom far from his master's
side.
      "Not long to wait now, is there?" said Kojirō.
      "No, sir."
      "Tomorrow I'll go to the castle and pay my respects to Lord Tadatoshi. I
      haven't seen him recently. After that, I want to spend a quiet night."
      "There are all those guests. Why don't you refuse to see them, so you can
      have a good rest?"
      "That's what I intend to do."
      "There are so many people around here, you could be defeated by your own
      supporters."
       "Don't talk like that. They've come from near and far.... Whether I win or
not depends on what happens at the appointed time. It's not entirely a matter of
fate, but then again ... That's the way with warriors—sometimes win, sometimes
lose. If Ganryū dies, you'll find two last testaments in my writing cabinet. Give
one of them to Kakubei and the other to Omitsu."
       "You've written a will?"
       "Yes. It's only proper for a samurai to take that precaution. One other
thing. On the day of the fight, I'm allowed one attendant. I want you to go with
me. Will you come?"
      "It's an honor I don't deserve."
      "Amayumi too." He looked at the falcon. "It'll be a comfort to me on the
      boat trip."
      "I understand perfectly."
      "Good. I'll see my aunt now."

       He found her sitting in his room. Outside, the evening clouds had
blackened, like newly forged steel that has just cooled off. The white light of a
candle brightened the room.
       "Thank you for coming," he said as he seated himself with a great show of
reverence. After his mother's death, his aunt had reared him. Unlike his mother,
she had not spoiled him in the least. Conscious of her duty to her elder sister, she
had striven single-mindedly to make him a worthy successor to the Sasaki name
and an outstanding man in his own right. Of all his kinsmen, she was the one
who had paid closest attention to his career and his future.
       "Kojirō," she began solemnly, "I understand you're about to face one of the
decisive moments of your life. Everybody back home is talking about it, and I
felt I had to see you, one more time at least. I'm happy to see you've come as far
as you have." She was silently comparing the dignified, well-to-do samurai in
front of her with the youth who had left home with nothing but a sword.
       Head still lowered, Kojirō replied, "It's been ten years. I hope you'll
forgive me for not keeping in touch with you. I don't know whether people
consider me a success or not, but I have by no means achieved all I am
determined to achieve. That's why I haven't written."
       "It doesn't matter. I hear news of you all the time."
       "Even in Iwakuni?"
       "Oh, indeed. Everyone there is for you. If you were to lose to Musashi, the
whole Sasaki family—the whole province—would be disgraced. Lord Katayama
Hisayasu of Hōki, who's staying as a guest in the Kikkawa fief, is planning to
bring a large group of Iwakuni samurai to see the bout."
       "Is he?"
       "Yes. They'll be terribly disappointed, I suppose, since no boats will be
allowed out.... Oh, I'm forgetting. Here, I brought this for you." She opened a
small bundle and took out a folded underrobe. It was made of white cotton; on it
were written the names of the god of war and a protective goddess worshiped by
warriors. A Sanskrit good-luck charm had been embroidered on both sleeves by
a hundred of Kojirō's female supporters.
       He thanked her and reverently held the garment up before his forehead.
Then he said, "You must be tired from your trip. You can stay here in this room
and go to bed whenever you wish. Now, if you'll excuse me."
       He left her and went to sit in another room, to which guests soon came
offering him a variety of gifts—a sacred charm from the Hachiman Shrine on
Mount Otoko, a coat of mail, an enormous sea bream, a barrel of sake. Before

long, there was hardly a place to sit down.
       While these well-wishers were sincere in their prayers for his victory, it
was also true that eight out of ten of them, not doubting that he would win, were
currying favor in the hope of advancing their own ambitions later on.
       "What if I were a rōnin?" thought Kojirō. Though the sycophancy
depressed him, he took satisfaction from the fact that it was he and no one else
who had caused his supporters to trust him and believe in him.
       "I must win. I must, I must."
       Thinking of winning placed a psychological burden on him. He realized
this but could not help himself. "Win, win, win." Like a wind-driven wave, the
word kept on repeating itself somewhere in his mind. Not even Kojirō was able
to grasp why the primitive urge to conquer buffeted his brain with such
persistence.
      The night wore on, but quite a number of guests stayed up, drinking and
      talking. It was quite late when the word came.
      "Musashi arrived today. He was seen getting off a boat in Moji and later
      walking down a street in Kokura."
      The response was electric, though uttered furtively, in excited whispers. "It
      stands to reason."
      "Shouldn't some of us go over there and take a look around?"
