Sweepers and Salesmen


      The cherry blossoms were pale, past their prime, and the thistle blossoms
were wilting, hinting nostalgically of the time centuries ago when Nara had been
the capital. It was a little warm for walking, but neither Gonnosuke nor Iori tired
of the road.
     Iori tugged at Gonnosuke's sleeve and said worriedly, "That man's still
     following us."
     Keeping his eyes straight ahead, Gonnosuke said, "Pretend you don't see
     him."
     "He's been behind us ever since we left the Kōfukuji."
     "Umm."
     "And he was at the inn where we stayed, wasn't he?"
     "Don't let it worry you. We don't have anything worth stealing." "We have
     our lives! They're not nothing."
     "Ha, ha. I keep my life locked up. Don't you?"
     "I can take care of myself." Iori tightened the grip of his left hand on his
     scabbard.
      Gonnosuke knew the man was the mountain priest who had challenged
Nankōbō the previous day, but couldn't imagine why he'd be tailing them. Iori
looked around again and said, "He's not there anymore."
      Gonnosuke looked back too. "He probably got tired." He took a deep
breath and added, "But it does make me feel better."
      They put up at a farmer's house that night and early the next morning
reached Amano in Kawachi. This was a small village of low-eaved houses,
behind which ran a stream of pristine mountain water. Gonnosuke had come to
have the memorial tablet to his mother placed in the Kongōji, the so-called
Women's Mount Kōya. But first he wanted to look up a woman named Oan,
whom he had known since childhood, so there would be someone to burn
incense before the tablet from time to time. If she could not be found, he
intended to go on to Mount Kōya, the burial place of the rich and the mighty. He
hoped he wouldn't have to; going there would make him feel like a beggar.
      Asking directions from a shopkeeper's wife, he was told that Oan was the
wife of a brewer named Tōroku and their house was the fourth one on the right

inside the temple gate.
       As he went through the gate, Gonnosuke wondered if the woman knew
what she was talking about, for there was a sign saying that bringing sake and
leeks into the sacred compound was prohibited. How could there be a brewery
there?
       This little mystery was cleared up that evening by Tōroku, who had made
them feel welcome and readily agreed to talk to the abbot about the memorial
tablet. Tōroku said that Toyotomi Hideyoshi had once tasted and expressed
admiration for the sake made for use by the temple. The priests had then
established the brewery to make sake for Hideyoshi and the other daimyō who
contributed to the temple's support. Production had fallen off somewhat after
Hideyoshi's death, but the temple still supplied a number of special patrons.
       When Gonnosuke and Iori awoke the next morning, Tōroku was already
gone. He returned a little past noon and said that arrangements had been made.
       The Kongōji was situated in the Amano River valley, amid peaks the color
of jade. Gonnosuke, Iori and Tōroku stopped for a minute on the bridge leading
to the main gate. Cherry blossoms floated in the water beneath the bridge.
Gonnosuke straightened his shoulders and an air of reverence seemed to settle
over him. Iori rearranged his collar.
       Approaching the main hall, they were greeted by the abbot, a tall, rather
stout man wearing an ordinary priest's robe. A torn basket hat and a long staff
would not have seemed unnatural.
       "Is this the man who wants to have a service said for his mother?" he
asked in a friendly voice.
       "Yes, sir," replied Tōroku, prostrating himself on the ground.
       Having expected a stern-visaged cleric in gold brocade, Gonnosuke was
somewhat confused in his greeting. He bowed and watched as the abbot came
down from the porch, slipped his big feet into dirty straw sandals and came to a
halt in front of him. Prayer beads in hand, the abbot directed them to follow him
and a young priest fell in behind them.
       They passed the Hall of Yakushi, the refectory, the one-story treasure
pagoda and the priests' living quarters. When they reached the Hall of Dainichi,
the young priest came forward and spoke to the abbot. The latter nodded and the
priest opened the door with an enormous key.
       Entering the large hall together, Gonnosuke and Iori knelt before the
priests' dais. Fully ten feet above this was a huge golden statue of Dainichi, the
universal Buddha of the esoteric sects. After a few moments, the abbot appeared

from behind the altar, attired in his cassock, and arranged himself on the dais.
The chanting of the sutra began, and he seemed to be subtly transformed into a
dignified high priest, his authority evident in the set of his shoulders.
       Gonnosuke clasped his hands in front of him. A small cloud seemed to
pass before his eyes and from it emerged an image of Shiojiri Pass, where he and
Musashi had tested each other. His mother was sitting to one side, straight as a
board, looking worried, just as she had been when she called out the word that
saved him in that fight.
       "Mother," he thought, "you don't have to worry about my future. Musashi
has consented to be my teacher. The day is not far off when I'll be able to
establish my own school. The world may be in turmoil, but I won't stray from
the Way. Nor will I neglect my duties as a son...."
       By the time Gonnosuke came out of his reverie, the chanting had stopped
and the abbot was gone. Beside him, Iori sat transfixed, his eyes glued to the
face of Dainichi, a miracle of sculptural sensitivity carved by the great Unkei in
the thirteenth century.
       "Why are you staring so, Iori?"
       Without moving his eyes, the boy said, "It's my sister. That Buddha looks
like my sister."
       Gonnosuke burst out laughing. "What are you talking about? You've never
even seen her. Anyway, no human could ever have the compassion and serenity
of Dainichi."
       Iori shook his head vigorously. "I have seen her. Near Lord Yagyū's
residence in Edo. And talked to her. I didn't know she was my sister then, but
just now, while the abbot was chanting, the Buddha's face turned into hers. She
seemed to be saying something to me."
       They went out and sat down on the porch, reluctant to break the spell of
the visions they had experienced.
       "The memorial service was for my mother," said Gonnosuke pensively.
"But it's been a good day for the living too. Sitting here like this, it's hard to
believe fighting and bloodshed exist."
       The metal spire of the treasure pagoda glistened like a jeweled sword in
the rays of the setting sun; all the other buildings stood in deep shadow. Stone
lanterns lined the darkened path leading up the steep hill to a Muromachi-style
teahouse and a small mausoleum.
       Near the teahouse, an old nun, her head covered with a white silk
bandanna, and a plump man of about fifty were sweeping leaves with straw

brooms.
       The nun sighed and said, "I guess it's better than it was." Few people came
to this part of the temple, even to clear away the winter's accumulation of leaves
and bird skeletons.
       "You must be tired, Mother," said the man. "Why don't you sit down and
rest? I'll finish up." He was dressed in a simple cotton kimono, sleeveless cloak,
straw sandals, and leather socks with a cherry blossom design, and carried a
short sword with an unadorned hilt made of sharkskin.
       "I'm not tired," she replied with a little laugh. "But what about you? You're
not used to this. Aren't your hands chapped?"
      "No, not chapped, but they're covered with blisters."
      The woman laughed again, saying, "Now, isn't that a nice reminder to take
      home with you?"
      "I don't mind. I feel my heart's been purified. I hope that means our little
      offering of labor has pleased the gods."
      "Oh, it's getting so dark. Let's leave the rest for tomorrow morning."
       Gonnosuke and Iori were standing by the porch now. Kōetsu and Myōshū
came down the path slowly, hand in hand. When they got near the Dainichi Hall,
both started and cried, "Who's there?"
       Then Myōshū said, "It's been a lovely day, hasn't it? Have you come for
sightseeing?"
       Gonnosuke bowed and said, "No, I've had a sutra read for my mother."
       "It's nice to meet young people who are grateful to their parents." She gave
Iori a maternal pat on the head. "Kōetsu, do you have any of those wheat cakes
left?"
      Taking a small package from his sleeve, Kōetsu offered it to Iori, saying,
      "Forgive me for offering you leftovers."
      "Gonnosuke, may I accept it?" asked Iori.
      "Yes," said Gonnosuke, thanking Kōetsu on Iori's behalf.
      "From the way you talk, you seem to be from the east," said Myōshū. "May
      I ask where you're going?"
       "It seems to be on an endless journey on a never-ending road. This boy and
I are fellow disciples in the Way of the Sword."
      "It's an arduous path you've chosen. Who is your teacher?"
      "His name is Miyamoto Musashi."
      "Musashi? You don't say!" Myōshū gazed into space, as though conjuring
      up a pleasant memory.

     "Where is Musashi now?" asked Kōetsu. "It's been a long time since last we
     saw him."
      Gonnosuke told them of Musashi's fortunes during the past couple of
years. As he listened, Kōetsu nodded and smiled, as if to say: "That's what I'd
expect of him."
      When he finished, Gonnosuke asked, "May I inquire who you are?"
      "Oh, forgive me for not telling you before." Kōetsu introduced himself and
his mother. "Musashi stayed with us for a while, several years ago. We're very
fond of him and often talk about him even now." He then told Gonnosuke about
two or three incidents that had occurred when Musashi was in Kyoto.
      Gonnosuke had long known of Kōetsu's reputation as a sword polisher,
and more recently he had heard of Musashi's relationship with the man. But he'd
never expected to run into this wealthy townsman tidying up neglected temple
grounds.
      "Is there a grave of someone close to you here?" he asked. "Or perhaps
you've come for an outing?"
      "No, nothing so frivolous as an outing," exclaimed Kōetsu. "Not in a holy
place like this.... Have you heard from the priests something of the history of the
Kongōji?"
      "No."
      "In that case allow me, in the priests' stead, to tell you a little about it.
Please understand, however, that I'm merely repeating what I've heard." Kōetsu
paused and looked around slowly, then said, "We have just the right moon
tonight," and pointed out the landmarks: above them the mausoleum, Mieidō and
Kangetsutei; below, the Taishidō, Shinto shrine, treasure pagoda, refectory and
two-story gate.
      "Look carefully," he said, seemingly under the spell of the lonely setting.
"That pine tree, those rocks, every tree, every blade of grass here, partake of the
invisible constancy, the elegant tradition of our country."
      He went on in this vein, solemnly telling how in the fourteenth century,
during a conflict between southern and northern courts, the mountain had been a
stronghold of the southern court. How Prince Morinaga, known also as Daitō no
Miya, had held secret conferences to plan the overthrow of the Hōjō regents.
How Kusunoki Masashige and other loyalists had fought the armies of the
northern court. Later the Ashikagas had come to power, and Emperor Go-
Murakami, driven from Mount Otoko, had been forced to flee from place to
place. Finally he took refuge at the temple and for many years lived the same

sort of life as the mountain priests, suffering the same deprivations. Using the
refectory as his seat of government, he had worked tirelessly to recover the
imperial prerogatives seized by the military.
      At an earlier time, when samurai and courtiers had gathered around the ex-
emperors Kōgon, Kōmyō and Sukō, the monk Zen'e had written poignantly:
"The priests' quarters and mountain temples were all swept away. The loss is
indescribable."
      Gonnosuke listened humbly, respectfully. Iori, awed by the gravity of
Kōetsu's voice, could not take his eyes from the man's face.
      Kōetsu took a deep breath and went on: "Everything here is a relic of that
age. The mausoleum is the last resting place of the Emperor Kōgon. Since the
decline of the Ashikagas, nothing's been properly taken care of. That's why my
mother and I decided to do a little cleaning up, as a gesture of reverence."
      Pleased by the attentiveness of his audience, Kōetsu searched diligently for
words to express his heartfelt emotions.
      "While we were sweeping, we found a stone with a poem carved on it,
perhaps by a soldier-priest of that age. It said:


           Though the war goes on,
           Even for a hundred years,
           Spring will return.
           Live with a song in your hearts,
           You, the Emperor's people.


        "Think of the bravery, the largeness of spirit it took for a simple soldier,
after fighting for years, perhaps decades, to protect the emperor, to be able to
rejoice and sing. I'm sure it's because the spirit of Masashige communicated
itself to him. Though a hundred years of fighting have passed, this place remains
a monument to the imperial dignity. Isn't this something for which we should be
very grateful?"
      "I didn't know this was the site of a sacred battle," said Gonnosuke. "I hope
      you'll forgive my ignorance."
      "I'm glad I had a chance to share with you some of my thoughts on the
      history of our country."
      The four of them strolled down the hill together. In the moonlight, their

     shadows seemed thin and unsubstantial.
      As they passed the refectory, Kōetsu said, "We've been here seven days.
We'll be leaving tomorrow. If you see Musashi, please tell him to come see us
again.
      Gonnosuke assured him that he would.


       The shallow, swift-flowing stream along the outer temple wall was like a
natural moat and was crossed by a dirt-floored bridge.
       Gonnosuke and Iori had hardly set foot on the bridge when a large white
figure armed with a staff emerged from the shadows and flew at Gonnosuke's
back. Gonnosuke evaded the attack by sliding to one side, but Iori was knocked
off the bridge.
       The man plunged on past Gonnosuke to the road on the other side of the
bridge. Turning around, he took a solid stance, his legs resembling small tree
trunks. Gonnosuke saw it was the priest who had been following him the
previous day.
       "Who are you?" shouted Gonnosuke.
       The priest said nothing.
       Gonnosuke moved his staff into striking position and shouted, "Who are
you? What reason do you have for attacking Musō Gonnosuke?"
       The priest acted as if he hadn't heard. His eyes spat fire as his toes,
protruding from heavy straw sandals, inched forward like a centipede in motion.
       Gonnosuke growled and cursed under his breath. His short, heavy limbs
bursting with the will to fight, he too inched forward.
       The priest's staff broke in two with a resounding crack. One part flew
through the air; the other the priest hurled with all his might at Gonnosuke's face.
It missed, but while Gonnosuke was recovering his balance, his opponent drew
his sword and stomped out onto the bridge.
       "You bastard!" shouted Iori.
       The priest gasped and put his hand to his face. The small stones Iori had
thrown had found their mark, one hitting him squarely in the eye. He spun
around and ran down the road.
      "Stop!" shouted Iori, scrambling up the bank with a handful of stones.
      "Never mind," said Gonnosuke, putting his hand on Iori's arm.
      "I guess that'll show him," gloated Iori, casting the stones toward the moon.
       Soon after they returned to Tōroku's house and went to bed, a squall came

up. The wind roared through the trees, threatening to tear the roof off the house,
but this was not the only thing that kept them from falling asleep right away.
      Gonnosuke lay awake thinking about past and present, wondering if the
world was really better off now than it had been in bygone ages. Nobunaga,
Hideyoshi and Ieyasu had won the hearts of the people, as well as the authority
to govern, but, he wondered, hadn't the true sovereign been virtually forgotten,
the people led to worship false gods? The age of the Hōjōs and Ashikagas had
been a hateful one, blatantly contradicting the very principle on which the
country was founded. Still, even then, great warriors, like Masashige and his
son, and loyalists from many provinces had followed the true warrior's code.
What had become of the Way of the Samurai? Gonnosuke asked himself. Like
the Way of the Townsman and the Way of the Farmer, it seemed to exist now
only for the sake of the military ruler.
      Gonnosuke's thoughts made his body feel warm all over. The peaks of
Kawachi, the woods around the Kongōji, the howling storm, seemed to become
living beings, calling to him in a dream.
      Iori could not get the unknown priest out of his mind. He was still thinking
of the ghostly white figure much later when the storm intensified. He pulled the
covers over his eyes and fell into a deep, dreamless sleep.


       When they set out the next day, the clouds above the mountains were
rainbow-colored. Just outside the village, a traveling merchant materialized from
the morning mist and wished them a jovial good morning.
       Gonnosuke replied perfunctorily. Iori, absorbed in the thoughts that had
kept him awake the night before, was no more talkative.
       The man tried to strike up a conversation. "You stayed at Tōroku's house
last night, didn't you? I've known him for years. Fine people, him and his wife."
       This elicited only a mild grunt from Gonnosuke.
       "I also call at Koyagyū Castle from time to time," said the merchant.
"Kimura Sukekurō had done me a lot of favors."
       This met with another grunt.
       "I see you've been to the 'Women's Mount Kōya.' I suppose now you'll be
going to Mount Kōya itself. It's just the right time of the year. The snow's gone,
and all the roads have been repaired. You can take your time crossing Amami
and Kiimi passes, spend the night at Hashimoto or Kamuro—"
       The man's probing about their itinerary made Gonnosuke suspicious.

"What business are you in?" he asked.
       "I sell braided cord," said the man, pointing to the small bundle on his
back. "The cord's made of flat-braided cotton. It was only invented recently, but
it's getting popular fast."
       "I see," said Gonnosuke.
       "Tōroku's helped me a lot, telling worshipers at the Kongōji about my
cord. As a matter of fact, I was planning to stay at his house last night, but he
said he already had two guests. That was sort of a disappointment. When I stay
with him, he always fills me up with good sake." He laughed.
       Relaxing a bit, Gonnosuke began asking questions about places along the
way, for the merchant was quite familiar with the local countryside. By the time
they reached Amami plateau, the conversation had grown fairly friendly.
      "Hey, Sugizō!"
      A man came trotting along the road to catch up with them.
      "Why did you go off and leave me? I was waiting at Amano Village. You
      said you'd stop by for me."
       "Sorry, Gensuke," said Sugizō. "I fell in with these two and we got to
talking. I forgot all about you." He laughed and scratched his head.
       Gensuke, who was dressed like Sugizō, turned out to be a cord salesman
too. As they walked, the two merchants fell to discussing business.
       Coming to a gully about twenty feet deep, Sugizō suddenly stopped talking
and pointed.
       "Oh, that's dangerous," he said.
       Gonnosuke stopped and looked at the gully, which might have been a gap
left by an earthquake, perhaps one that happened a very long time ago. "What
seems to be the trouble?" he asked.
       "Those logs, they're not safe to cross. See, there—some of the rocks
supporting them have been washed away. We'll fix it so the logs are steady."
Then he added, "We should do that for the sake of other travelers."
       Gonnosuke watched as they squatted at the edge of the cliff and began
packing rocks and dirt under the logs. While thinking that these two merchants
traveled a great deal, and thus knew the difficulties of travel as well as anybody,
he was a little surprised. It was unusual for men like them to care enough about
others to go to the trouble of repairing a bridge.
       Iori didn't give the matter any thought. Impressed by their show of
concern, he contributed by gathering rocks for them.
       "That should do it," said Gensuke. He took a step on the bridge, decided it

was safe and said to Gonnosuke, "I'll go first." Holding his arms out for balance,
he crossed quickly to the other side, then beckoned for the others to follow.
       At Sugizō's urging, Gonnosuke went next, Iori just behind him. They were
not quite to the middle when they let out a shout of surprise. Ahead of them,
Gensuke had a lance pointed at them. Gonnosuke looked back and saw Sugizō
had also acquired a lance.
       "Where did the lances come from?" thought Gonnosuke. He swore, bit his
lip angrily and considered the awkwardness of his position.
       "Gonnosuke, Gonnosuke . . ." Taken off guard, Iori clung to Gonnosuke's
waist, while Gonnosuke, holding his arm around the boy, shut his eyes for an
instant, entrusting his life to the will of heaven.
       "You bastards!"
       "Shut up!" shouted the priest, who stood higher up on the road, behind
Gensuke, his left eye swollen and black.
       "Keep calm," Gonnosuke told Iori in a soothing voice. Then he shouted.
"So you're behind this! Well, watch out, you thieving bastards! You've tangled
with the wrong man this time!"
       The priest stared coldly at Gonnosuke. "You're not worth robbing. We
know that. If you're no smarter than that, what are you doing trying to be a spy?"
"You calling me a spy?"
       "Tokugawa dog! Throw that staff away. Put your hands behind your back.
And don't try anything funny."
       "Ah!" sighed Gonnosuke, as though the will to fight was deserting him.
"Look, you're making a mistake. I did come from Edo, but I'm not a spy. My
name is Musō Gonnosuke. I'm a shugyōsha ."
       "Never mind the lies."
       "What makes you think I'm a spy?"
       "Our friends in the east told us some time ago to be on the lookout for a
man traveling with a young boy. You were sent down here by Lord Hōjō of Awa,
weren't you?"
      "No."
      "Drop the staff and come along peacefully."
      "I'm not going anywhere with you."
      "Then you'll die right here."
      Gensuke and Sugizō began to close in from front and back, lances ready for
      action.
       To keep Iori out of harm's way, Gonnosuke slapped him on the back. With

a loud shriek, Iori dived into the bushes covering the bottom of the gully.
Thundering "Y-a-a-h!" Gonnosuke rushed Sugizō.
      The lance requires some space and good timing to be effective. Sugizō
extended his arm to thrust his weapon forward but missed the exact moment. A
loud croak came from his throat as the blade cut through thin air. Gonnosuke
slammed into him, and he fell backward, with Gonnosuke on top of him. When
Sugizō attempted to rise, Gonnosuke rammed his right fist into his face. Sugizō
bared his teeth but the effect was ludicrous, for his face was already a bloody
mess. Gonnosuke stood up, used Sugizō's head for a springboard and cleared the
distance to the end of the bridge.
      Staff poised, he shouted, "I'm here waiting, you cowards!"
      Even as he shouted, three ropes came slithering across the top of the grass,
one weighted with a sword guard, another with a short sword in its scabbard.
One rope looped around Gonnosuke's arm, another around his legs and the third
around his neck. In a moment, still another rope wound around his staff.
      Gonnosuke wriggled like an insect caught in a spiderweb, but not for long.
Half a dozen men ran out of the woods behind him. By the time they were
finished, he lay helpless on the ground, trussed up tighter than a bundle of straw.
With the exception of the surly priest, all his captors were dressed as cord
salesmen.
      "No horses?" asked the priest. "I don't want to walk him all the way to
Mount Kudo."
      "We can probably hire a horse in Amami Village."
