The Marriage


       Nuinosuke went first to Magobeinojō's house, showed him the letter and
explained the circumstances. He left immediately, not even taking time for a cup
of tea, and made quick stops at the other five houses.
       Up the beach from the shore commissioner's office, he positioned himself
behind a tree and watched the bustle that had been going on since early morning.
Several teams of samurai had already left for Funashima—the ground cleaners,
the witnesses, the guards—each group in a separate boat. On the beach another
small boat stood ready for Kojirō. Tadatoshi had had it built especially for this
occasion, of new timber, with new water brooms and new hemp-palm ropes.
       The people seeing Kojirō off numbered about a hundred. Nuinosuke
recognized some as friends of the swordsman; many others he did not know.
Kojirō finished his tea and came out of the commissioner's office, accompanied
by the officials. Having entrusted his favorite pony to friends, he walked across
the sand toward the boat. Tatsunosuke followed close behind. The crowd silently
arranged itself into two rows and made way for their champion. Seeing the way
Kojirō was dressed made many imagine that they themselves were about to go
into battle.
       He had on a narrow-sleeved silk kimono, solid white with a raised figured
pattern; over this, a sleeveless cloak of brilliant red. His purple leather hakama
was of the type that is gathered just below the knees and is tight, like leggings,
on the calf. His straw sandals appeared to have been dampened slightly to keep
them from slipping. Besides the short sword he always carried, he had the
Drying Pole, which he had not used since becoming an official in the House of
Hosokawa. His white, full-cheeked face was a study in calm above the flaming
red of his cloak. There was something grand, something almost beautiful, about
Kojirō today.
       Nuinosuke could see that Kojirō's smile was quiet and confident. Flashing
his grin in all directions, he looked happy and perfectly at ease.
       Kojirō stepped into the boat. Tatsunosuke got in after him. There were two
crewmen, one in the prow and the other manning the scull. Amayumi perched on
Tatsunosuke's fist.
       Once clear of the shore, the sculler moved his arms with great languid

strokes, and the little vessel glided gently forward.
       Startled by the cries of the well-wishers, the falcon flapped its wings.
       The crowd broke up into small groups and slowly dispersed, marveling
over Kojirō's calm demeanor and praying that he would win this fight of all
fights.
       "I must get back," thought Nuinosuke, remembering his responsibility to
see that Sado departed on time. As he turned away, he caught sight of a girl.
Omitsu's body was pressed tightly against the trunk of a tree, and she was crying.
       Feeling it indecent to stare, Nuinosuke averted his eyes and slipped away
noiselessly. Out in the street again, he took a parting look at Kojirō's boat, then at
Omitsu. "Everyone has a public and private life," he thought. "Behind all that
fanfare, a woman stands weeping her heart out."
       On the boat, Kojirō asked Tatsunosuke for the falcon and held out his left
arm. Tatsunosuke transferred Amayumi to his fist and respectfully moved away.
       The tide was flowing swiftly. The day was perfect—clear sky, crystal
water—but the waves were rather high. Each time water splashed over the
gunwale, the falcon, in a fighting mood, ruffled its feathers.
       When they were about halfway to the island, Kojirō removed the band
from its leg and threw the bird into the air, saying, "Go back to the castle."
       As though hunting as usual, Amayumi attacked a fleeing seabird, sending
down a flurry of white feathers. But when its master did not call it back, it
swooped down low over the islands, then soared into the sky and disappeared.
       After releasing the falcon, Kojirō began stripping himself of the Buddhist
and Shinto good-luck charms and writings showered on him by his supporters,
casting them overboard, one by one—even the cotton underrobe with the
embroidered Sanskrit charm given him by his aunt.
       "Now," he said softly, "I can relax." Faced with a life-or-death situation, he
did not want to be bothered with memories or personalities. Being reminded of
all those people who were praying for his victory was a burden. Their good
wishes, no matter how sincere, were now more of a hindrance than a help. What
mattered now was himself, his naked self.
       The salty breeze caressed his silent face. His eyes were fixed on the green
pines of Funashima.
       In Shimonoseki, Tarōzaemon walked past a row of beach sheds and
entered his shop. "Sasuke," he called. "Hasn't anybody seen Sasuke?" Sasuke
was among the youngest of his many employees, but also one of the brightest.
Treasured as a household servant, he also helped out in the shop from time to

time.
       "Good morning," said Tarōzaemon's manager, emerging from his station in
the accounting office. "Sasuke was here just a few minutes ago." Turning to a
young assistant, he said, "Go find Sasuke. Hurry."
       The manager started to bring Tarōzaemon up to date on business matters,
but the merchant cut him off, shaking his head as though a mosquito were after
him. "What I want to know is whether anybody's been here looking for
Musashi."
       "As a matter of fact, there was someone here already this morning."
       "The messenger from Nagaoka Sado? I know about him. Anybody else?"
       The manager rubbed his chin. "Well, I didn't see him myself, but I'm told
that a dirty-looking man with sharp eyes came last night. He was carrying a long
oak staff and asked to see 'Musashi Sensei.' They had a hard time getting rid of
him."
       "Somebody blabbed. And after I told them how important it was to keep
quiet about Musashi's being here."
       "I know. I told them too, in no uncertain terms. But you can't do anything
with the young ones. Having Musashi here makes them feel important." "How
did you get rid of the man?"
       "Sōbei told him he was mistaken, Musashi's never been here. He finally
left, whether he believed it or not. Sōbei noticed there were two or three people
waiting outside for him, one a woman."
       Sasuke came running up from the pier. "Do you want me, sir?"
       "Yes. I wanted to make sure you're ready. It's very important, you know."
"I realize that, sir. I've been up since before sunrise. I washed in cold water
       and put on a new white cotton loincloth."
       "Good. The boat's all ready, the way I told you last night?"
       "Well, there wasn't much to do. I picked out the fastest and cleanest of the
boats, sprinkled salt around to purify it and swabbed it down inside and out. I'm
ready to leave whenever Musashi is."
       "Where's the boat?"
       "On the shore with the other boats."
       After thinking a moment, Tarōzaemon said, "We'd better move it. Too
many people will notice when Musashi leaves. He doesn't want that. Take it up
by the big pine, the one called the Heike Pine. Hardly anyone goes by there."
       "Yes, sir."
       The shop, usually quite busy, was nearly deserted. Nervously upset,

Tarōzaemon went out into the street. Here and in Moji, on the opposite shore,
people were taking the day off—men who appeared to be samurai from
neighboring fiefs, rōnin, Confucian scholars, blacksmiths, armorers, lacquer-
makers, priests, townsmen of all descriptions, some farmers from the
surrounding countryside. Scented women in veils and broad traveling hats.
Fishermen's wives with children on their backs or clinging to their hands. They
were all moving in the same general direction, trying vainly to get closer to the
island, through there was no vantage point from which anything smaller than a
tree could be seen.
       "I see what Musashi means," thought Tarōzaemon. To be set upon by this
mob of sightseers, to whom the fight was merely a spectacle, would be
unendurable.
       Returning to his house, he found the whole place fastidiously clean. In the
room open to the beach, wave patterns flickered on the ceiling.
       "Where have you been, Father? I've been looking for you." Otsuru came in
with tea.
       "Nowhere in particular." He lifted his teacup and gazed pensively into it.
       Otsuru had come to spend some time with her beloved father. By chance,
traveling from Sakai on the same vessel with Musashi, she had discovered they
both had ties with Iori. When Musashi came to pay his respects to Tarōzaemon
and thank him for taking care of the boy, the merchant had insisted Musashi stay
at his house and had instructed Otsuru to look after him.
       The night before, while Musashi talked to his host, Otsuru sat in the next
room sewing the new loincloth and stomach wrapper he'd said he wanted on the
day of the bout. She had already prepared a new black kimono, from which at a
moment's notice she could remove the basting used to keep the sleeves and skirt
properly folded until time for use.
       It crossed Tarōzaemon's mind that Otsuru just might be falling in love with
Musashi. There was a worried look on her face; something serious was on her
mind.
      "Otsuru, where Musashi? Have you given him his breakfast?"
      "Oh, yes. Long ago. After that, he shut the door to his room."
      "Getting ready, I suppose."
      "No, not yet."
      "What's he doing?"
      "He seems to be painting a picture."
      "Now?"

      "Yes."
       "Hmm. We were talking about painting, and I asked him if he'd paint a
picture for me. I guess I shouldn't have done that."
       "He said he'd finish it before he left. He's painting one for Sasuke too."
       "Sasuke?" Tarōzaemon echoed incredulously. He was growing more and
more nervous. "Doesn't he know it's getting late? You should see all the people
milling about the streets."
       "From the look on Musashi's face, you'd think he'd forgotten the bout."
"Well, it's no time to be painting. Go tell him that. Be polite, but let him know
that can wait till later."
       "Why me? I couldn't ... "
       "And why not?" His suspicion that she was in love was confirmed. Father
and daughter communicated silently but perfectly. Grumbling good-naturedly,
"Silly child. Why are you crying?" he got up and went toward Musashi's room.
       Musashi was kneeling silently, as though in meditation, his brush, ink box
and brush pot beside him. He had already finished one painting—a heron
beneath a willow tree. The paper before him now was still blank. He was
considering what to draw. Or more exactly, quietly trying to put himself into the
right frame of mind, for that was necessary before he could visualize the picture
or know the technique he would employ.
       He saw the white paper as the great universe of nonexistence. A single
stroke would give rise to existence within it. He could evoke rain or wind at will,
but whatever he drew, his heart would remain in the painting forever. If his heart
was tainted, the picture would be tainted; if his heart was listless, so would the
picture be. If he attempted to make a show of his craftsmanship, it could not be
concealed. Men's bodies fade away, but ink lives on. The image of his heart
would continue to breathe after he himself was gone.
       He realized that his thoughts were holding him back. He was on the brink
of entering the world of nonexistence, of letting his heart speak for itself,
independent of his ego, free from the personal touch of his hand. He tried to be
empty, waiting for that sublime state in which his heart could speak in unison
with the universe, selfless and unhampered.
       The sounds from the street did not reach his room. Today's bout seemed
completely apart from himself. He was conscious merely of the tremulous
movements of the bamboo in the inner garden.
       "May I intrude?" The shoji behind him opened noiselessly, and
Tarōzaemon peered in. It seemed wrong, almost evil, to barge in, but he braced

himself and said, "I'm sorry to distract you when you seem to be enjoying your
work so."
      "Ah, please come in."
      "It's nearly time to leave."
      "I know."
      "Everything's ready. All the things you'll need are in the next room." "That's
      very kind of you."
      "Please don't worry about the paintings. You can finish them when you
      come back from Funashima."
       "Oh, it's nothing. I feel very fresh this morning. It's a good time to paint."
"But you have to think of the time."
      "Yes, I know."
      "Whenever you want to make your preparations, just call. We're waiting to
      help you."
      "Thank you very much." Tarōzaemon started to leave, but Musashi said,
      "What time is high tide?"
      "At this season, the tide's lowest between six and eight in the morning. It
      should be on the rise again about now."
      "Thank you," Musashi said absently, again addressing his attention to the
      white paper.
       Tarōzaemon quietly closed the shoji and went back to the parlor. He
intended to sit down and wait quietly, but before long his nerves got the better of
him. He rose and strode out to the veranda, from where he could see the current
running through the strait. The water was already advancing on the beach.
      "Father."
      "What is it?"
      "It's time for him to leave. I put his sandals out at the garden entrance."
      "He's not ready yet."
      "Still painting?"
      "Yes."
      "I thought you were going to make him stop and get ready."
      "He knows what time it is."
       A small boat pulled up on the beach nearby, and Tarōzaemon heard his
name called. It was Nuinosuke, asking, "Has Musashi left yet?" When
Tarōzaemon said no, Nuinosuke said rapidly, "Please tell him to get ready and
start as quickly as possible. Kojirō's already left, and so has Lord Hosokawa. My
master's leaving from Kokura right now."

        "I'll do my best."
        "Please! Maybe I sound like an old woman, but we want to be sure he's not
late. It'd be a shame to bring dishonor on himself at this point." He rowed away
hurriedly, leaving the shipping broker and his daughter to fret by themselves on
the veranda. They counted the seconds, glancing from time to time toward the
little room in the back, from which came not the slightest sound.
        Soon a second boat arrived with a messenger from Funashima, sent to
hurry Musashi along.
        Musashi opened his eyes at the sound of shoji opening. There was no need
for Otsuru to announce her presence. When she told him about the boat from
Funashima, he nodded and smiled affably. "I see," he said, and left the room.
        Otsuru glanced at the floor where he had been sitting. The piece of paper
was now heavily blotched with ink. At first the picture looked like an indistinct
cloud, but she soon saw that it was a landscape of the "broken ink" variety. It
was still wet.
        "Please give that picture to your father," Musashi called above the sound
of splashing water. "And the other one to Sasuke."
        "Thank you. You really shouldn't have done it."
        "I'm sorry I don't have anything better to offer, after all the trouble you've
gone to, but I hope your father will accept it as a keepsake."
        Otsuru replied thoughtfully, "Tonight, by all means, come back and sit by
the fire with my father, as you did last night."
        Hearing the rustling of clothes in the next room, Otsuru felt pleased. At
last he was getting dressed. Then there was silence again, and the next thing she
knew, he was talking to her father. The conversation was very brief, only a few
succinct words. As she passed through the next room, she noticed he had neatly
folded his old clothes and placed them in a box in the corner. An indescribable
loneliness seized her. She bent over and nestled her face against the still warm
kimono.
        "Otsuru!" called her father. "What are you doing? He's leaving!"
        "Yes, Father." She brushed her fingers over her cheeks and eyelids and ran
to join him.
        Musashi was already at the garden gate, which he had chosen to avoid
being seen. Father, daughter and four or five others from the house and shop
came as far as the gate. Otsuru was too overwrought to utter a word. When
Musashi's eyes turned toward her, she bowed like the others.
        "Farewell," said Musashi. He went through the low gate of woven grass,

closed it behind him and said, "Take good care of yourselves." By the time they
raised their heads, he was walking rapidly away.
       They stared after him, but Musashi's head did not turn.
       "I guess that's the way it's supposed to be with samurai," someone
mumbled. "He leaves—just like that: no speech, no elaborate good-byes,
nothing."
       Otsuru disappeared immediately. A few seconds later, her father retreated
into the house.
       The Heike Pine stood in solitude about two hundred yards up the beach.
Musashi walked toward it, his mind completely at rest. He had put all his
thoughts into the black ink of the landscape painting. It had felt good to be
painting, and he considered his effort a success.
       Now for Funashima. He was setting forth calmly, as though this were any
other journey. He had no way of knowing whether he would ever return, but he
had stopped thinking about it. Years ago, when at the age of twenty-two he had
approached the spreading pine at Ichijōji, he had been very keyed up, shadowed
by a sense of impending tragedy. He had gripped his lonely sword with intense
determination. Now he felt nothing.
       It was not that the enemy today was less to be feared than the hundred men
he had confronted then. Far from it. Kojirō, fighting alone, was a more
formidable opponent than any army the Yoshioka School could have mounted
against him. There was not the least doubt in Musashi's mind but that he was
going into the fight of his life.
       "Sensei!"
       "Musashi!"
       Musashi's mind did a turn at the sound of the voices and the sight of two
people running toward him. For an instant he was dazed.
       "Gonnosuke!" he exclaimed. "And Granny! How did you two get here?"
Both, grimy from travel, knelt in the sand in front of him.
      "We had to come," said Gonnosuke.
      "We came to see you off," said Osugi. "And I came to apologize to you."
      "Apologize? To me?"
      "Yes. For everything. I must ask you to forgive me."
      He looked inquiringly at her face. The words sounded unreal. "Why do you
      say that, Granny? Has something happened?"
       She stood with her hands clasped pleadingly. "What can I say? I've done so
many evil things, I can't hope to apologize for all of them. It was all ... all a

horrible mistake. I was blinded by my love for my son, but now I know the truth.
Please forgive me."
       He stared at her for a moment, then knelt and took her hand. He dared not
raise his eyes, for fear there might be tears in them. Seeing the old woman so
contrite made him feel guilty. But he felt gratitude too. Her hand trembled; even
his was quivering slightly.
       It took him a moment to pull himself together. "I believe you, Granny. I'm
grateful to you for coming. Now I can face death without regrets, go into the
bout with my spirit free and my heart untroubled."
       "Then you'll forgive me?"
       "Of course I will, if you'll forgive me for all the trouble I've caused you
since I was a boy."
       "Of course; but enough of me. There's another person who needs your
help. Someone who's very, very sad." She turned, inviting him to look.
       Under the Heike Pine, looking shyly at them, her face pale and dewy with
anticipation, stood Otsū.
       "Otsū!" he shouted. In a second, he was before her, not knowing himself
how his feet had transported him there. Gonnosuke and Osugi stood where they
were, wishing they could disappear into thin air and leave the shore to the couple
alone.
     "Otsū, you've come."
     Words did not exist to bridge the chasm of years, to convey the world of
     feeling brimming inside him.
     "You don't look well. Are you ill?" He mumbled the words, like an isolated
     line from a long poem.
       "A little." Eyes lowered, she struggled to remain cool, to keep her wits
about her. This moment—perhaps the last—must not be spoiled, nor wasted.
       "Is it just a cold?" he asked. "Or something serious? What's wrong? Where
have you been these past few months?"
       "I went back to the Shippōji last fall."
       "Back home?"
       "Yes." She looked straight at him, her eyes becoming as limpid as the
ocean depths, struggling to hold back the tears. "But there's no real home for an
orphan like me. Only the home inside me."
       "Don't talk like that. Why, even Osugi seems to have opened her heart to
you. That makes me very happy. You must recover your health and learn to be
happy. For me."

       "I'm happy now."
       "Are you? If that's true, I'm happy too.... Otsū . . ." He bent toward her. She
stood stiffly, conscious of Osugi and Gonnosuke. Musashi, who had forgotten
them, put his arm around her and brushed his cheek against hers.
       "You're so thin ... so thin." He was acutely conscious of her fevered
breathing. "Otsū, please forgive me. I may seem heartless, but I'm not, not where
you're concerned."
      "I ... I know that."
      "Do you? Truly?"
      "Yes, but I beg you, say one word for me. Just one word. Tell me that I'm
      your wife."
      "It would spoil it if I told you what you know already."
       "But ... but . . ." She was sobbing with her whole body, but with a burst of
strength, she seized his hand and cried, "Say it. Say I'm your wife throughout
this life."
       He nodded, slowly, silently. Then one by one he pulled her delicate fingers
from his arm and stood erect. "A samurai's wife must not weep and go to pieces
when he goes off to war. Laugh for me, Otsū. Send me away with a smile. This
may be your husband's last departure."
       Both knew the time had come. For a brief moment, he looked at her and
smiled. Then he said, "Until then."
       "Yes. Until then." She wanted to return his smile but only managed to hold
back the tears.
       "Farewell." He turned and walked with firm strides toward the water's
edge. A parting word rose to her throat but refused to be uttered. The tears
welled up irrepressibly. She could no longer see him.
       The strong, salty wind ruffled Musashi's sideburns. His kimono flapped
briskly.
       "Sasuke! Bring the boat a little closer."
       Though he had been waiting for over two hours and knew Musashi was on
the beach, Sasuke had carefully kept his eyes averted. Now he looked at Musashi
and said, "Right away, sir."
       With a few strong, rapid movements, he poled the boat in. When it touched
shore, Musashi jumped lightly into the prow, and they moved out to sea. "Otsū!
Stop!" The shout was Jōtarō's.
      Otsū was running straight toward the water. He raced after her. Startled,
      Gonnosuke and Osugi joined in the chase.

     "Otsū, stop! What are you doing?"
     "Don't be foolish!"
     Reaching her simultaneously, they threw their arms around her and held her
     back.
      "No, no," she protested, shaking her head slowly. "You don't understand."
"Wh-what are you trying to do?"
      "Let me sit down, by myself." Her voice was calm.
      They released her, and she walked with dignity to a spot a few yards away,
where she knelt on the sand, seemingly exhausted. But she had found her
strength. She straightened her collar, smoothed her hair, and bowed toward
Musashi's little craft.
      "Go without regrets," she said.
      Osugi knelt and bowed. Then Gonnosuke. And Jōtarō. After coming all the
way from Himeji, Jōtarō had missed his chance to speak to Musashi, despite his
intense yearning to say a parting word. His disappointment was softened by the
knowledge that he had given his share of Musashi's time to Otsū.
