At Daybreak


       Musashi arrived in Shimonoseki several days early. Since he knew no one
there, and no one knew him, he passed his time quietly, unbothered by
sycophants and busybodies.
       On the morning of the eleventh, he crossed the Kammon Strait to Moji to
call on Nagaoka Sado and confirm his acceptance of the time and place of the
bout.
       A samurai received him at the entrance hall, staring unabashedly, one
thought going through his mind: "So this is the famous Miyamoto Musashi!" All
the young man said aloud, however, was: "My master is still at the castle but
should be back shortly. Please come in and wait."
       "No, thank you; I have no other business with him. If you'd just be so kind
as to give him my message ..."
       "But you've come so far. He'll be very disappointed to have missed you. If
you really have to go, please let me at least tell the others that you're here."
       He'd hardly disappeared into the house when Iori came rushing out and
into Musashi's arms.
       "Sensei!"
      Musashi patted him on the head. "Have you been studying, like a good
      boy?"
      "Yes, sir."
      "You've grown so tall!"
      "Did you know I was here?"
       "Yes; Sado told me in a letter. I also heard about you at Kobayashi
Tarōzaemon's in Sakai. I'm glad you're here. Living in a house like this will be
good for you."
      Looking disappointed, Iori said nothing.
      "What's the matter?" asked Musashi. "You mustn't forget that Sado's been
      very good to you."
      "Yes, sir."
       "You have to do more than just practice martial arts, you know. You have
to learn from books. And although you should be the first to help when help is
needed, you should try to be more modest than the other boys."

       "Yes, sir."
       "And don't fall into the trap of feeling sorry for yourself. Many boys like
you, who've lost a father or mother, do that. You can't repay the
warmheartedness of others unless you're warm and kind in return."
       "Yes, sir."
       "You're bright, Iori, but be careful. Don't let your rough upbringing get the
best of you. Keep yourself under tight rein. You're still a child; you have a long
life ahead of you. Guard it carefully. Save it until you can give it for a really
good cause—for your country, your honor, the Way of the Samurai. Hold on to
your life and make it honest and brave."
       Iori had the sinking feeling that this was a parting, a final farewell. His
intuition probably would have told him this even if Musashi hadn't spoken of
such serious matters, but the mention of the word "life" left little doubt. No
sooner had Musashi said it than Iori's head was buried in his chest. The child
sobbed uncontrollably.
       Musashi, noting that Iori was very well groomed—his hair nicely combed
and tied and his white socks immaculate—now regretted his sermon. "Don't cry,"
he said.
      "But what if you ... "
      "Stop your bawling. People will see you."
      "You ... you're going to Funashima the day after tomorrow?"
      "Yes, I have to."
      "Win, please win. I can't bear to think of not seeing you again." "Ha, ha.
      You're crying about that?"
      "Some people say you can't beat Kojirō—you shouldn't have agreed to fight
      him in the first place."
      "I'm not surprised. People always talk like that."
       "You can win, though, can't you, Sensei?"
      "I wouldn't even waste my time thinking about it."
      "You mean you're sure you won't lose?"
      "Even if I do lose, I promise to do it bravely."
      "But if you think you might, couldn't you just go away somewhere for a
      while?"
       "There's always a germ of truth in the worst of gossip, Iori. I may have
made a mistake, but now that it's gone this far, to run away would be to forsake
the Way of the Samurai. That would bring dishonor not only on me but on many
others as well."

       "But didn't you say I should hang on to my life and guard it carefully?"
"Yes, I did, and if they bury me on Funashima, let that be a lesson to you and
avoid getting into fights that may end in your throwing your life away." Sensing
that he was overdoing it, he changed the subject. "I've already asked that my
respects be conveyed to Nagaoka Sado. I want you to convey them too, and tell
him that I'll see him on Funashima."
       Musashi gently shook himself free of the boy. As he walked toward the
gate, Iori clung to the basket hat in his hand. "Don't ... Wait ... " was all he could
say. He put his other hand to his face. His shoulders were shaking.
       Nuinosuke came through a door beside the gate and introduced himself to
Musashi. "Iori seems reluctant to let you go, and I'm inclined to sympathize with
him. I'm sure you have other things to do, but couldn't you just stay over here
one night?"
       Musashi, returning his bow, said, "It's good of you to ask, but I don't think
I should. In a couple of days I may be asleep for good. I don't think it'd be right
for me to burden others now. It might prove to be an embarrassment later on."
       "That's very considerate of you, but I'm afraid the master will be furious
with us for letting you go."
       "I'll send him a note explaining everything. I only came today to pay my
respects. I think I should be leaving now."
       Outside the gate, he turned toward the beach, but before he'd got halfway
there, he heard voices calling from behind. Looking back, he saw a handful of
elderly-looking samurai from the House of Hosokawa, two of whom had gray
hair. Not recognizing any of them, he assumed they were shouting to someone
else and walked on.
       Upon reaching the shore, he stood and gazed out over the water. A number
of fishing boats rested at anchor in the offing, their furled sails ashen in the misty
light of early evening. Beyond the larger mass of Hikojima, the outline of
Funashima was barely visible.
      "Musashi!"
      "You are Miyamoto Musashi, aren't you?"
      Musashi turned to face them, wondering what business these aged warriors
      could have with him.
       "You don't remember us, do you? Didn't think you would. It's been too
long. My name's Utsumi Magobeinojō. All six of us are from Mimasaka. We
used to be in the service of the House of Shimmen at Takeyama Castle."
       "And I'm Koyama Handayū. Magobeinojō and I were close friends of your

father's."
       Musashi smiled broadly. "Well, this is a surprise!" Their drawl,
unmistakably that of his native village, stirred up many childhood memories.
After bowing to each of them, he said, "It's good to see you. But tell me, how
does it happen you're all here together, so far from home?"
       "Well, as you know, the House of Shimmen was disbanded after the Battle
of Sekigahara. We became rōnin and fled to Kyushu, came here to Buzen
Province. For a while, to keep body and soul together, we wove straw
horseshoes. Later, we had a stroke of good luck."
       "Is that so? Well, I must say, I never expected to meet friends of my
father's in Kokura."
       "It's an unexpected pleasure for us too. You're a fine-looking samurai,
Musashi. Too bad your father isn't here to see you now."
       For a few minutes they commented to one another on Musashi's fine
appearance. Then Magobeinojō said, "Stupid of me; I'm forgetting what we
came after you for. We just missed you at Sado's house. Our plan was to spend
an evening with you. It's all been arranged with Sado."
       Handayū chimed in, "That's right. It was very rude of you to come as far as
the front door and leave without seeing Sado; you're the son of Shimmen
Munisai. You should know better. Now come back with us." Apparently he felt
that having been a friend of Musashi's father authorized him to issue orders to
the son. Without waiting for an answer, he started walking away, expecting
Musashi to follow.
       Musashi, on the point of accompanying them, stopped himself.
       "I'm sorry," he said. "I don't think I should go. I apologize for being so
rude, but I think it'd be wrong for me to join you."
       Everyone came to a halt, and Magobeinojō said, "Wrong? What's wrong
about it? We want to give you a proper welcome—same village and all that, you
know."
       "Sado's looking forward to it too. You don't want to offend him, do you?"
Magobeinojō, sounding resentful, added, "What's the matter? Angry about
something?"
       "I'd like to go," Musashi said politely, "but there are other things to
consider. Though it's probably just a rumor, I've heard that my bout with Kojirō
is a source of friction between the two oldest retainers in the House of
Hosokawa, Nagaoka Sado and Iwama Kakubei. They say Iwama's side has the
approval of Lord Tadatoshi, and Nagaoka is trying to strengthen his own faction

by opposing Kojirō."
       This was met with murmurs of surprise.
       "I feel sure," Musashi continued, "that it's no more than idle speculation,
but still, public talk is a dangerous thing. What happens to a rōnin like myself
doesn't matter much, but I wouldn't want to do anything to fan the rumors and
raise suspicions about either Sado or Kakubei. They're both valuable men in the
fief."
       "I see," said Magobeinojō.
       Musashi smiled. "Well, at least that's my excuse. To tell the truth, being a
country boy, it's difficult for me to have to sit around and be polite all evening.
I'd just like to relax."
       Impressed with Musashi's consideration for others but still reluctant to part
with him, they put their heads together and discussed the situation.
       "This is the eleventh day of the fourth month," said Handayū. "For the past
ten years, the six of us have been getting together on this date. We have an
ironclad rule against inviting outsiders, but you're from the same village, you're
Munisai's son, so we'd like to ask you to join us. It may not be the sort of
entertainment we should provide, but you won't have to worry about having to
be polite, or being seen or talked about."
       "If you put it that way," said Musashi, "I don't see how I can refuse."
       The answer pleased the old samurai immensely. After another short
huddle, it was arranged that Musashi would meet one of them, a man named
Kinami Kagashirō, a couple of hours later in front of a tea shop, and they went
their separate ways.
       Musashi met Kagashirō at the appointed hour, and they walked about a
mile and a half from the center of town to a place near Itatsu Bridge. Musashi
saw no samurai houses or restaurants, nothing but the lights of a solitary
drinking shop and a cheap inn, both some distance away. Ever on the alert, he
began turning possibilities over in his mind. There was nothing suspicious about
their story; they looked the right age and their dialect fit in with their story. But
why an out-of-the-way place like this?
       Kagashirō left him and went toward the riverbank. Then he called
Musashi, saying, "They're all here. Come on down," and led the way along the
narrow path on the dike.
       "Maybe the party's on a boat," thought Musashi, smiling at his own
excessive cautiousness. But there was no boat. He found them sitting on reed
mats in formal style.

       "Forgive us for bringing you to a place like this," said Magobeinojō. "This
is where we hold our meeting. We feel some special good fortune has brought
you to be with us. Sit down and rest awhile." His manner grave enough to be
welcoming an honored guest into a fine parlor with silver-covered shoji, he
pushed a strip of matting forward for Musashi.
       Musashi wondered if this was their idea of elegant restraint or if there was
some particular reason for not meeting in a more public place. But as a guest, he
felt constrained to act as one. Bowing, he seated himself formally on the mat.
       "Make yourself comfortable," urged Magobeinojō. "We'll have a little
party later, but first we have to perform our ceremony. It won't take long."
       The six men rearranged themselves more informally, each man taking a
sheaf of the straw they'd brought with them, and they proceeded to weave straw
horseshoes. Mouths tightly closed, eyes never leaving their work, they appeared
solemn, even pious. Musashi watched respectfully, sensing strength and fervor in
their movements as they spat on their hands, ran the straw through their fingers
and plaited it between their palms.
       "I guess this'll do," said Handayū, laying down a finished pair of
horseshoes and looking around at the others.
       "I'm finished too."
       They placed their horseshoes in front of Handayū, brushed themselves off
and straightened their clothes. Handayū piled the horseshoes on a small table in
the middle of the circle of samurai, and Magobeinojō, the oldest, stood up.
       "It's now the twelfth year since the Battle of Sekigahara, since that day of
defeat that will never be erased from our memories," he began. "We've all lived
longer than we had any right to expect. This we owe to the protection and bounty
of Lord Hosokawa. We must see that our sons and grandsons remember his
lordship's goodness to us."
       Murmurs of assent went around the group. They sat in a reverent attitude,
their eyes lowered.
       "We must also remember forever the largesse of successive heads of the
House of Shimmen, even though that great house no longer exists. Nor should
we ever forget the misery and hopelessness that were ours when we came here. It
is to remind us of these three things that we hold this meeting each year. Now let
us pray as one man for one another's health and welfare."
       In chorus, the men replied, "The goodness of Lord Hosokawa, the largesse
of the House of Shimmen, the bounty of heaven that has delivered us from
distress—we will not forget for a day."

       "Now make the obeisance," said Magobeinojō.
       They turned toward the white walls of Kokura Castle, seen dimly against
the dark sky, and bowed to the ground. Then they turned in the direction of
Mimasaka Province and bowed again. Finally, they faced the horseshoes and
bowed a third time. Each movement was carried out with the utmost gravity and
sincerity.
       To Musashi, Magobeinojō said, "Now we're going to the shrine above here
and make an offering of the horseshoes. After that we can get on with the party.
If you'll just wait here."
       The man who led the way carried the table with the horseshoes at forehead
level, the others following single file. They tied their handiwork to the branches
of a tree beside the shrine entrance. Then, after clapping their hands once before
the deity, they rejoined Musashi.
       The fare was simple—a stew with taros, bamboo shoots with bean paste,
and dried fish—the sort of meal served in local farmhouses. But there was much
sake, and much laughter and talk.
       When the mood became convivial, Musashi said, "It's a great honor to be
asked to join you, but I've been wondering about your little ceremony. It must
have some very special meaning for you."
       "It does," said Magobeinojō. "When we came here as defeated warriors,
we had no one to turn to. We would rather have died than steal, but we had to
eat. Finally, we hit on the idea of setting up shop over there by the bridge and
making horseshoes. Our hands were calloused from training with lances, so it
took some effort to teach them to weave straw. We did that for three years,
selling our work to passing grooms and somehow making enough to stay alive.
       "The grooms came to suspect that weaving straw wasn't our usual
occupation, and eventually someone told Lord Hosokawa Sansai about us.
Learning we were former vassals of Lord Shimmen, he sent a man to offer us
positions."
       He told how Lord Sansai had offered a collective stipend of five thousand
bushels, which they refused. They were willing to serve him in good faith, but
they felt the lord-to-vassal relationship should be on a man-to-man basis. Sansai
understood their feelings and came back with an offer of individual stipends. He
had also been understanding when his retainers expressed fears that the six rōnin
would not be able to attire themselves in a suitable manner to be presented to his
lordship. But when a special allowance for clothes was suggested, Sansai said
no, it would only cause embarrassment. Actually the fears were unwarranted, for

as low as they had sunk, they were still able to dress in starched clothes and wear
their two swords when they went to receive their appointments.
       "It wouldn't have been difficult to forget how hard our lives were doing
menial work. If we hadn't stuck together, we wouldn't have been alive for Lord
Sansai to engage us. We mustn't let ourselves forget that providence took care of
us during those difficult years."
       Ending his recital, he held up a cup, saying, "Forgive me for talking so
long about us. I just wanted you to know we're men of goodwill, even if our
sake's not first class and the food not very plentiful. We want you to put up a
brave fight the day after tomorrow. If you lose, we'll bury your bones for you,
don't worry."
       Accepting the cup, Musashi replied, "I'm honored to be here among you.
It's better than drinking the very best sake in the finest mansion. I only hope I'll
be as lucky as you've been."
       "Don't hope that! You'll have to learn to weave horseshoes."
       The sound of sliding dirt cut short their laughter. Their eyes went to the
dike, where they saw the crouching batlike figure of a man.
       "Who's there?" cried Kagashirō, on his feet at once. Another man rose,
drawing his sword, and the two climbed the dike and peered through the mist.
       Laughing, Kagashirō called down, "It seems to have been one of Kojirō's
followers. He probably thinks we're Musashi's seconds and we're having a secret
strategy session. He got away before we got a good look at him."
       "I can see Kojirō's supporters doing that," remarked one man.
       The atmosphere remained lighthearted, but Musashi decided not to linger
any longer. The last thing he wanted was to do anything that might bring harm to
these men later. He thanked them profusely for their kindness and left them to
their party, walking casually into the darkness.
       At least, he seemed casual.


     Nagaoka's cold wrath for letting Musashi leave his house fell on several
people, but he waited until the morning of the twelfth to dispatch men to look for
him.
     When the men reported they couldn't find Musashi—had no idea where he
was—Sado's white eyebrows shot up anxiously. "What could have happened to
him? Is it possible—" He did not want to finish the thought.
     Also on the twelfth, Kojirō called at the castle and was warmly received by

Lord Tadatoshi. They had some sake together, and Kojirō left in high spirits,
riding his favorite pony.
      By evening, the town was humming with rumors.
      "Musashi probably got scared and ran away."
      "No doubt about it. He's gone."
       That night was a sleepless one for Sado. He tried to convince himself that
it simply wasn't possible—Musashi wasn't the type to run away.... Still, it was
not unknown for a seemingly reliable person to break down under stress. Fearing
the worst, Sado foresaw having to commit seppuku, the only honorable solution
if Musashi, whom he had recommended, failed to show up.
       The bright, clear dawn of the thirteenth found him walking in the garden
with Iori, asking himself over and over: "Was I mistaken? Did I misjudge the
man?"
       "Good morning, sir." Nuinosuke's tired face appeared at the side gate. "Did
you find him?"
       "No, sir. None of the innkeepers have seen anyone even resembling him."
"Did you ask at the temples?"
       "The temples, the dōjō, all the other places students of the martial arts go
to. Magobeinojō and his group have been out all night and—"
       "They haven't come back yet." Sado's brow furrowed. Through the fresh
leaves of the plum trees, he could see the blue sea; the waves seemed to be
beating against his very chest. "I don't understand it."
       "He's nowhere to be found, sir."
       One by one the searchers returned, tired and disappointed. Assembling
near the veranda, they talked the situation over in a mood of anger and
desperation.
       According to Kinami Kagashirō, who had passed by Sasaki Kojirō's house,
several hundred supporters had gathered outside the gate. The entrance was
bedecked with bunting bearing a festive gentian crest, and a gold screen had
been placed directly before the door from which Kojirō was to emerge. At dawn,
contingents of his followers had gone to the three main shrines to pray for his
victory.
       Unrelieved gloom prevailed at Sado's house, the burden being especially
heavy for the men who had known Musashi's father. They felt betrayed. If
Musashi reneged, it would be impossible for them to face their fellow samurai or
the world at large.
       When Sado dismissed them, Kagashirō vowed, "We'll find the bastard. If

not today, some other day. And when we do, we'll kill him."
       Returning to his own room, Sado lit the incense in the incense burner, as
he did every day, but Nuinosuke detected a special gravity in the deliberateness
of his movements. "He's preparing himself," he thought, grieved to think that it
had come to this.
       Just then Iori, standing at the edge of the garden gazing at the sea, turned
and asked, "Did you try the house of Kobayashi Tarōzaemon?"
       Nuinosuke realized instinctively that Iori had hit on something. No one
had gone to the shipping broker's establishment, but it was exactly the sort of
place Musashi would choose so as to keep out of sight.
     "The boy's right," exclaimed Sado, his face brightening. "How stupid of us!
     Get over there right away!"
     "I'm going too," said Iori.
     "Is it all right for him to go along?"
     "Yes, he can go too. Now hurry.... No, wait a minute."
       He dashed off a note and informed Nuinosuke of its contents: "Sasaki
Kojirō will cross to Funashima in a boat provided by Lord Tadatoshi. He will
arrive by eight o'clock. You can still make it by then. I suggest you come here
and make your preparations. I'll provide a boat to take you to your glorious
victory."
       In Sado's name, Nuinosuke and Iori procured a fast craft from the fief's
boatmaster. They made it to Shimonoseki in record time, then proceeded directly
to Tarōzaemon's shop.
       In response to their inquiry, a clerk said, "I don't know any details, but it
appears there's a young samurai staying at the master's house."
       "That's it! We've found him." Nuinosuke and Iori grinned at each other and
rapidly covered the short distance between shop and house.
       Confronting Tarōzaemon directly, Nuinosuke said, "This is fief business,
and it's urgent. Is Miyamoto Musashi staying here?"
     "Yes."
     "Thank heaven. My master's been worried sick. Quick now, tell Musashi
     I'm here."
     Tarōzaemon went into the house and reappeared a minute later, saying,
     "He's still in his room. He's sleeping."
     "Sleeping?" Nuinosuke was appalled.
     "He was up late last night, talking with me over some sake."
     "This is no time to be sleeping. Wake him up. Right now!"

      The merchant, refusing to be pressured, showed Nuinosuke and Iori into a
      guest room before going to awaken Musashi.
      When Musashi joined them, he appeared well rested, eyes as clear as a
      baby's.
      "Good morning," he said cheerfully as he seated himself. "Is there
      something I can do for you?"
      Nuinosuke, deflated by the nonchalant greeting, silently handed him Sado's
      letter.
       "How good of him to write," said Musashi, raising the letter to his
forehead before breaking the seal and opening it. Iori was staring a hole through
Musashi, who acted as if he wasn't even there. After reading the letter, he rolled
it up and said, "I'm grateful for Sado's thoughtfulness." Only then did he glance
at Iori, causing the boy to lower his head to hide his tears.
       Musashi wrote a reply and handed it to Nuinosuke. "I've explained
everything in the letter," he said, "but be sure to convey my thanks and my best
wishes." He added that they were not to worry. He would go to Funashima in his
own good time.
       There was nothing they could do, so they left. Iori hadn't said a word to
Musashi, nor Musashi to him. Yet the two had communicated to each other the
mutual devotion of teacher and pupil.


       As Sado read Musashi's reply, a look of relief spread across his face. The
letter said:


      My deepest thanks for your offer of a boat to take me to Funashima. I do
not deem myself worthy of such an honor. Moreover, I do not feel that I should
accept. Please take into consideration that Kojirō and I are facing each other as
opponents, and that he is using a boat provided by Lord Tadatoshi. If I were to
go in your boat, it would appear that you were opposing his lordship. I do not
think you should do anything on my behalf.
      Although I should have told you this earlier, I refrained because I knew
you would insist upon helping me. Rather than involve you, I came and stayed at
Tarōzaemon's house. I shall also have the use of one of his boats to go to
Funashima, at the hour I think appropriate. Of that you may rest assured.

       Deeply impressed, Sado stared silently at the writing for a time. It was a
good letter, modest, thoughtful, considerate, and he was now ashamed of his
agitation of the day before.
      "Nuinosuke."
      "Yes, sir."
      "Take this letter and show it to Magobeinojō and his comrades, as well as
      the others concerned."
       Nuinosuke had just left, when a servant came in and said, "If your business
is finished, sir, you should get ready to leave now."
       "Yes, of course, but there's still plenty of time," Sado replied quietly. "It's
not early. Kakubei's already left."
      "That's his business. Iori, come here a minute."
      "Sir?"
      "Are you a man, Iori?"
      "I think so."
      "Do you think you can keep from crying, whatever happens?"
      "Yes, sir."
       "All right then, you can go to Funashima with me as my attendant. But
remember one thing: we may have to pick up Musashi's corpse and bring it back
with us. Could you still keep from crying?"
       "Yes, sir. I will, I swear I will."
       Nuinosuke had no sooner hurried through the gate than a shabbily dressed
       woman called to him. "Pardon me, sir, but are you a retainer in this
house?" Nuinosuke stopped and looked at her suspiciously. "What do you
want?" "Forgive me. Looking the way I do, I shouldn't be standing in front of
your
      gate."
      "Well, why are you doing it, then?"
      "I wanted to ask ... it's about the fight today. People are saying Musashi's
      run away. Is that true?"
       "You stupid wench! How dare you! You're talking about Miyamoto
Musashi. Do you think he'd do a thing like that? Just wait until eight o'clock and
you'll see. I've just been to see Musashi."
      "You saw him?"
      "Who are you?"
      She dropped her eyes. "I'm an acquaintance of Musashi."

       "Hmph. But still you worry about groundless rumors? All right—I'm in a
hurry, but I'll show you a letter from Musashi." He read it aloud for her, not
noticing the man with tearful eyes looking over his shoulder. When he did
notice, he jerked his shoulder back and said, "Who are you? What do you think
you're doing?"
     Wiping the tears from his eyes, the man bowed sheepishly. "Sorry. I'm with
     this woman."
     "Her husband?"
     "Yes, sir. Thank you for showing us the letter. I feel like I've actually seen
     Musashi. Don't you, Akemi?"
     "Yes; I feel so much better. Let's go find a place to watch."
       Nuinosuke's anger evaporated. "If you go to the top of that hill over there
by the shore, you should be able to see Funashima. As clear as it is today, you
might even be able to make out the sandbar."
     "We're sorry to have made a nuisance of ourselves when you're in a hurry.
     Please forgive us."
     As they started to walk away, Nuinosuke said, "Just a minute—what are
     your names? If you don't mind, I'd like to know."
     They turned and bowed. "My name's Matahachi. I was born in the same
     village as Musashi."
     "My name's Akemi."
     Nuinosuke nodded and ran off.
       They watched him for a few moments, exchanged glances and hurried on
to the hill. From there, they could see Funashima jutting up among a number of
other islands, the mountains of Nagato in the distance beyond. They spread some
reed matting on the ground and sat down. The waves rumbled below them, and a
pine needle or two floated down. Akemi took the baby from her back and began
nursing it. Matahachi, his hands on his knees, stared fixedly out over the water.
