A Falcon and a Woman


       At the time of the Battle of Sekigahara, Kokura had been the site of a
fortress commanded by Lord Mōri Katsunobu of Iki. Since then the castle had
been rebuilt and enlarged and acquired a new lord. Its towers and glistening
white walls bespoke the great power and dignity of the House of Hosokawa,
headed now by Tadatoshi, who had succeeded his father, Tadaoki.
       In the short time since Kojirō's arrival, the Ganryū Style, developed on the
foundation he had learned from Toda Seigen and Kanemaki Jisai, had swept over
all Kyushu. Men even came from Shikoku to study under him, hoping that after
a year or two of training they would be awarded a certificate and receive
sanction to return home as teachers of this new style.
       Kojirō enjoyed the esteem of those around him, including Tadatoshi, who
had been heard to remark with satisfaction, "I found myself a very good
swordsman." In every quarter of the extensive Hosokawa household, it was
agreed that Kojirō was a person of "outstanding character." And when he
traveled between his home and the castle, he did so in style, attended by seven
lancers. People went out of their way to approach him and pay their respects.
       Until his coming, Ujiie Magoshirō, a practitioner of the Shinkage Style,
had been the clan's chief sword instructor, but his star dimmed rapidly as
Kojirō's grew more brilliant. Kojirō treated him magniloquently. To Lord
Tadatoshi, he had said, "You mustn't let Ujiie go. While his style is not flashy, it
does have a certain maturity we younger men lack." He suggested that he and
Magoshirō give lessons in the castle's dōjō on alternate days, and this was put
into practice.
       At one point, Tadatoshi said, "Kojirō says Magoshirō's method is not
flashy, but mature. Magoshirō says Kojirō is a genius with whom he cannot
match swords. Who is right? I'd like to see a demonstration."
       The two men agreed to subsequently face each other with wooden swords
in his lordship's presence. At the first opportunity, Kojirō discarded his weapon,
and seating himself at his opponent's feet, announced, "I'm no match for you.
Forgive my presumption."
       "Don't be modest," replied Magoshirō. "I'm the one who's not a worthy
opponent."

       Witnesses were divided as to whether Kojirō acted out of compassion or
self-interest. In any case, his reputation rose still higher.
       Kojirō's attitude toward Magoshirō remained charitable, but whenever
someone made favorable mention of Musashi's growing fame in Edo and Kyoto,
he was quick to set him straight.
       "Musashi?" he would say with disdain. "Oh, he's been crafty enough to
make something of a name for himself. He talks about his Two-Sword Style, I'm
told. He's always had a certain natural ability. I doubt whether there's anybody in
Kyoto or Osaka who could defeat him." He always made it appear that he was
restraining himself from saying more.
       An experienced warrior visiting Kojirō's house one day said, "I've never
met the man, but people say this Miyamoto Musashi is the greatest swordsman
since Kōizumi and Tsukahara, with the exception of Yagyū Sekishūsai, of
course. Everybody seems to think that if he's not the greatest swordsman, he's at
least reached the level of a master."
       Kojirō laughed and the color rose in his face. "Well, people are blind," he
said bitingly. "So I suppose some consider him a great man or an expert
swordsman. That just goes to show you how far the Art of War has declined,
with regard to both style and personal conduct. We live in an age when a clever
publicity seeker can rule the roost, at least as far as ordinary people are
concerned.
       "Needless to say, I look at it differently. I saw Musashi trying to sell
himself in Kyoto some years ago. He gave an exhibition of his brutality and
cravenness in his bout with the Yoshioka School at Ichijōji. Cravenness is not a
low enough word for the likes of him. All right, so he was outnumbered, but
what did he do? He showed his back at the earliest possible moment.
Considering his past and his overweening ambition, I see him as a man not
worth spitting on.... Ha, ha—if a man who spends his life trying to learn the Art
of War is an expert, then I suppose Musashi's an expert. But a master of the
sword—no, not that."
       He obviously took praise of Musashi as a personal affront, but his
insistence on winning anyone and everyone over to his point of view was so
vehement that even his staunchest admirers began to wonder. Eventually the
word got around that there was a long-standing enmity between Musashi and
Kojirō. Before long, rumors of a match were flying.
       It was at Lord Tadatoshi's order that Kojirō had finally issued a challenge.
In the several months since then, the entire Hosokawa fief had buzzed with

speculation as to when the fight would be held and how it would turn out.
       Iwama Kakubei, now well along in years, called on Kojirō morning and
evening, whenever he could find the slightest excuse. On an evening early in the
fourth month, when even the pink double-petal cherry blossoms had fallen,
Kakubei walked through Kojirō's front garden, past bright red azaleas blooming
in the shadows of ornamental rocks. He was shown to an inner room lit only by
the failing light of the evening sun.
       "Ah, Master Iwama, good to see you," said Kojirō, who was standing just
outside, feeding the falcon on his fist.
       "I have news for you," said Kakubei, still standing. "The clan council
discussed the place for the bout today in his lordship's presence and reached a
decision."
       "Have a seat," said an attendant from the adjacent room.
       With no more than a grunt of thanks, Kakubei sat down and continued: "A
number of sites were suggested, among them Kikunonagahama and the bank of
the Murasaki River, but they were all rejected because they were too small or too
accessible to the public. We could put up bamboo fencing, of course, but even
that wouldn't prevent the riverbank from being overrun by swarms of people
looking for thrills."
       "I see," replied Kojirō, still intently watching the falcon's eyes and beak.
       Kakubei, expecting his report to be received more or less with bated
breath, was crestfallen. A guest would not normally do such a thing, but Kakubei
said, "Come inside. This is nothing to be talking about while you're standing out
there."
       "In a minute," Kojirō said casually. "I want to finish feeding the bird."
       "Is that the falcon Lord Tadatoshi gave you after you went hunting
together last fall?"
       "Yes. Its name is Amayumi. The more I get used to it, the better I like it."
He threw away the rest of the food and, winding up the red-tasseled cord
attached to the bird's neck, said to the young attendant behind him, "Here,
Tatsunosuke—put it back in its cage."
       The bird was passed from fist to fist, and Tatsunosuke started across the
spacious garden. Beyond the customary man-made hillock was a grove of pines,
bordered on the other side by a fence. The compound lay along the Itatsu River;
many other Hosokawa vassals lived in the vicinity.
      "Forgive me for making you wait," said Kojirō.
      "Think nothing of it. I'm not exactly an outsider. When I come here, it's

      almost like being at my son's house."
      A maid of twenty or so came in and gracefully poured tea. With a glance at
      the guest, she invited him to have a cup.
      Kakubei shook his head admiringly. "It's good to see you, Omitsu. You're
      always so pretty."
       She blushed down to the collar of her kimono. "And you're always making
fun of me," she replied before quickly slipping out of the room.
       Kakubei said, "You say the more you get used to your falcon, the better
you like it. What about Omitsu? Wouldn't it be better to have her at your side,
rather than a bird of prey? I've been meaning to ask you about your intentions
regarding her."
       "Has she by any chance secretly visited your house at one time or
another?" "I'll admit she did come to talk to me."
       "Stupid woman! She hasn't said a word about it to me." He shot an angry
glance at the white shoji.
       "Don't let it upset you. There's no reason why she shouldn't come." He
waited until he thought Kojirō's eyes had softened a little, then went on: "It's
only natural for a woman to worry. I don't think she doubts your affection for
her, but anybody in her position would worry about the future. I mean, what's to
become of her?"
       "I suppose she told you everything?"
       "Why shouldn't she? It's the most ordinary thing in the world to happen
between a man and a woman. One of these days you'll want to get married. You
have this big house and lots of servants. Why not?"
       "Can't you imagine what people would say if I married a girl I'd previously
had in my house as a maid?"
       "Does it really make any difference? You certainly can't throw her aside
now. If she weren't a suitable bride for you, it might be awkward, but she's of
good blood, isn't she? I'm told she's the niece of Ono Tadaaki."
       "That's correct."
       "And you met her when you went to Tadaaki's dōjō and opened his eyes to
the sad state his school of swordsmanship was in."
       "Yes. I'm not proud of it, but I can't keep it from someone as close to me as
you are. I'd planned to tell you the whole story sooner or later.... As you say, it
happened after my bout with Tadaaki. It was already dark when I started for
home, and Omitsu—she was living with her uncle at the time—brought a small
lantern and walked down Saikachi Slope with me. Without giving it a thought, I

flirted with her a bit along the way, but she took me seriously. After Tadaaki
disappeared, she came to see me and—"
       Now it was Kakubei's turn to be embarrassed. He waved his hand to let his
protégé know he had heard enough. Actually, he had not known until very
recently that Kojirō had taken the girl in before leaving Edo for Kokura. He was
surprised not only at his own naiveté but also at Kojirō's ability to attract a
woman, have an affair with her and keep the whole thing secret.
       "Leave everything to me," he said. "At the moment, it would be rather
inappropriate for you to announce your marriage. First things first. It can be
done after your bout." Like so many others, he was confident that final
justification for Kojirō's fame and position would be forthcoming within a few
days.
       Remembering why he'd come, he went on: "As I said, the council has
decided the location for the bout. Since one requirement was that it be within
Lord Tadatoshi's domain, but somewhere that crowds can't get to easily, it was
agreed that an island would be ideal. The island chosen is a small one called
Funashima, between Shimonoseki and Moji."
       He looked thoughtful for a minute, then said, "I wonder if it wouldn't be
wise to look the terrain over before Musashi arrives. It might give you a certain
advantage." His reasoning was that from a knowledge of the lay of the land, a
swordsman would have an idea of how the fighting would proceed, how tightly
to tie his sandals, how to make use of the terrain and the position of the sun. At
the very least, Kojirō would have a sense of security, which would be impossible
if he were entering the place for the first time.
       He suggested they hire a fishing boat and go out to look at Funashima the
next day.
       Kojirō disagreed. "The whole point of the Art of War is to be quick to
seize an opening. Even when a man takes precautions, it often happens that his
opponent will have anticipated them and devised means of offsetting them. It's
much better to approach the situation with an open mind and move with perfect
freedom."
       Seeing the logic of this argument, Kakubei made no more mention of
going to Funashima.
       Summoned by Kojirō, Omitsu served them sake, and the two men drank
and chatted until late in the evening. From the relaxed way in which Kakubei
sipped his sake, it was evident that he was pleased with life and felt that his
efforts to assist Kojirō had been rewarded.

       Rather like a proud father, he said, "I think it's all right to tell Omitsu.
When this is over, we can invite her relatives and friends here for the marriage
ceremony. It's a fine thing for you to be devoted to your sword, but you must
also have a family if your name is to be carried on. When you're married, I'll feel
I've done my duty by you."
       Unlike the happy old retainer with many years of service, Kojirō showed
no signs of drunkenness. But then he was prone to silence these days anyway.
Once the bout had been decided on, Kakubei had suggested and Tadatoshi had
agreed to release Kojirō from his duties. He had enjoyed the unaccustomed
leisure at first, but as the day approached and more and more people came to
call, he found himself forced to entertain them. Recently, times when he could
rest had become few. Still, he was reluctant to shut himself away and have
people turned back at the gate. If he did that, people would think he'd lost his
composure.
       The idea that came to him was to go out into the country every day, his
falcon on his fist. In nice weather, hiking over field and mountain with only the
bird for a companion did his spirit good.
       When the falcon's alert azure eyes spotted a victim in the sky, Kojirō
would release it. Then his own eyes, equally alert, would follow it as it rose and
swooped down on its quarry. Until the feathers began to drift to earth, he
remained breathless, transfixed, as though he himself were the falcon.
       "Good! That's the way!" he exclaimed when the falcon made the kill. He
had learned much from this bird of prey, and as a result of these hunting
excursions, his face showed more confidence with the passage of each day.
       Returning home in the evening, he was met by Omitsu's eyes, swollen
from crying. It hurt him to observe her efforts to disguise this. To him, losing to
Musashi was inconceivable. Nevertheless, the question of what would happen to
her if he was killed crept into his mind.
       So did the image of his dead mother, to whom he had given scarcely a
thought for years. And each night as he was falling asleep, a vision of the
falcon's azure eyes and the swollen eyes of Omitsu came to visit him, jumbled in
an odd way with a fleeting memory of his mother's face.
