The Writing Teacher


       The sign at the entrance to a narrow alley in the fishmongers' district of
Okazaki read: "Enlightenment for the Young. Lessons in Reading and Writing,"
and bore the name Muka, who was from all appearances one of the many
impoverished but honest rōnin making a living by sharing his warrior-class
education with the children of commoners.
       The curiously amateurish calligraphy brought a smile to the lips of
passersby, but Muka said he wasn't ashamed of it. Whenever it was mentioned,
he always replied in the same way: "I'm still a child at heart. I'm practicing along
with the children."
       The alley ended in a bamboo grove, beyond which was the riding ground
of the House of Honda. In fair weather it was always covered by a cloud of dust,
since the cavalrymen often practiced from dawn to dusk. The military lineage
they were so proud of was that of the famous Mikawa warriors, the tradition that
had produced the Tokugawas.
       Muka stirred from his midday nap, went to the well and drew water. His
solid-gray unlined kimono and gray hood might well have been the dress of a
man of forty, but he was in fact not yet thirty. After washing his face, he walked
into the grove, where he cut down a thick bamboo with a single sword stroke.
       After washing the bamboo at the well, he went back inside. Blinds hanging
on one side kept out the dust from the riding ground, but since this was the
direction from which light came, the one room seemed smaller and darker than it
actually was. A board lay flat in one corner; above it hung an anonymous portrait
of a Zen priest. Muka set the piece of bamboo on the board and tossed a
bindweed flower into the hollow center.
       "Not bad," he thought, as he backed away to examine his work.
       Sitting down in front of his table, he took his brush and began practicing,
using as models a manual on squarish, formal characters by Ch'u Sui-liang and a
rubbing of the priest Kōbō Daishi's calligraphy. He had evidently been
progressing steadily during the year he had lived there, for the characters he
wrote now were far superior to the ones on the sign.
       "May I trouble you?" asked the woman from next door, the wife of a man
who sold writing brushes.

       "Come in, please," said Muka.
       "I only have a minute. I was just wondering.... A few minutes ago I heard a
loud noise. It sounded like something breaking. Did you hear it?"
       Muka laughed. "That was only me, cutting down a piece of bamboo."
       "Oh. I was worried. I thought something might have happened to you. My
husband says the samurai prowling around here are out to kill you."
       "It wouldn't matter if they did. I'm not worth three coppers anyway."
       "You shouldn't be so easygoing. Lots of people get killed for things they
don't even remember doing. Think how sad all the girls would be if some harm
came to you."
       She went on her way, not asking, as she often did, "Why don't you take a
wife? It isn't that you don't like women, is it?" Muka never gave a clear answer,
though he'd brought it on himself by carelessly revealing enough to suggest that
he would make a fine catch. His neighbors knew he was a rōnin from Mimasaka,
who liked to study and had lived for a time in Kyoto and in and around Edo. He
professed to want to settle down in Okazaki and run a good school. Since his
youth, diligence and honesty were apparent, it wasn't surprising that a number of
girls had shown an interest in marriage, as well as several parents with eligible
daughters.
       This small corner of society had a certain fascination for Muka. The brush
seller and his wife treated him kindly, the wife teaching him how to cook and
sometimes doing his washing and sewing. All in all, he enjoyed living in the
neighborhood. Everybody knew everybody else, and all sought out new ways to
make their lives interesting. There was always something going on, if not a
festival or street dances or a religious celebration, then a funeral or a sick person
to be cared for.
       That evening he passed the brush seller's house as he and his wife were
having dinner. With a click of her tongue, the wife said, "Where does he go? He
teaches the children in the morning, takes a nap or studies in the afternoon, then
in the evening he's gone. He's just like a bat."
       Her husband chuckled. "What's wrong with that? He's single. You ought
not to begrudge him his nightly excursions."
       In the streets of Okazaki, the sounds of a bamboo flute mingled with the
buzzing of captive insects in wooden cages, the rhythmical wail of blind street
singers, the cries of vendors of melons and sushi. There was nothing here of the
frantic bustle that characterized Edo. Lanterns flickered; people strolled about in
summer kimono. In the lingering heat of a summer day, everything seemed

relaxed and in its place.
      As Muka passed, the girls whispered.
      "There he goes again."
      "Hmph—paying no attention to anybody, as usual."
      Some of the young women bowed to him, then turned to their friends and
      speculated on his destination.
       Muka walked straight on, past the side streets where he might have
purchased the favors of the Okazaki harlots, regarded by many to be one of the
chief local attractions along the Tōkaidō highroad. At the western edge of town
he stopped and stretched, letting the heat out of his sleeves. Ahead of him were
the rushing waters of the Yahagi River and the 208-span Yahagi Bridge, the
longest on the Tōkaidō. He walked toward the thin figure waiting for him at the
first post.
      "Musashi?"
      Musashi smiled at Matahachi, who was wearing his priest's robe. "Has the
      master returned?" he asked.
      "No."
       They walked across the bridge shoulder to shoulder. On a pine-covered hill
on the opposite bank stood an old Zen temple. Since the hill was known as
Hachijō, the temple had come to be called Hachijōji. They climbed up the dark
slope in front of the gate.
       "How are things?" asked Musashi. "Practicing Zen must be difficult."
       "It is," replied Matahachi, bowing his bluish shaved head dejectedly. "I've
often thought of running away. If I have to go through mental torture to become
a decent human being, I might as well put my head in a noose and forget about
it."
       "Don't let it discourage you. You're still only at the beginning. Your real
training won't come until after you've appealed to the master and persuaded him
to take you as a disciple."
       "It's not always impossible. I've learned to discipline myself a little. And
whenever I feel low, I think of you. If you can overcome your difficulties, I
should be able to overcome mine."
       "That's the way it should be. There's nothing I can do that you can't do
too."
       "Remembering Takuan helps. If it hadn't been for him, I'd have been
executed."
       "If you can bear up under hardship, you can experience a pleasure greater

than the pain," Musashi said solemnly. "Day and night, hour by hour, people are
buffeted by waves of pain and pleasure, one after the other. If they try to
experience only pleasure, they cease to be truly alive. Then the pleasure
evaporates."
       "I'm beginning to understand."
       "Think of a simple yawn. The yawn of a person who's been working hard
is different from the yawn of a lazy man. Lots of people die without knowing the
pleasure yawning can bring."
       "Umm. I hear talk like that at the temple."
       "I hope the day soon comes when I turn you over to the master. I want to
ask him for guidance too. I need to know more about the Way."
       "When do you suppose he'll come back?"
       "It's hard to say. Zen masters sometimes float around the country like a
cloud for two or three years at a time. Now that you're here, you should resolve
to wait four or five years for him, if it comes to that."
       "You, too?"
       "Yes. Living in that back alley, among poor and honest people, is good
training—part of my education. It's not time wasted."


       After leaving Edo, Musashi had passed through Atsugi. Then, driven by
doubts about his future, he had disappeared into the Tanzawa Mountains, to
emerge two months later more worried and haggard than ever. Solving one
problem only led him to another. At times he was so tortured his sword seemed
like a weapon turned against him.
       Among the possibilities he had considered was choosing the easy way. If
he could bring himself to live in a comfortable, ordinary way with Otsū, life
would be simple. Almost any fief would be willing to pay him enough to live on,
perhaps five hundred to a thousand bushels. But when he put it to himself in the
form of a question, the answer was always no. An easy existence imposed
restrictions; he could not submit to them.
       At other times he felt as lost in base, craven illusions as the hungry
demons in hell; then, for a time, his mind would clear, and he would bask in the
pleasure of his proud isolation. In his heart there was a continual struggle
between light and dark. Night and day, he wavered between exuberance and
melancholy. He'd think of his swordsmanship and be dissatisfied. Thinking of
how long the Way was, how far he was from maturity, a sickness came over his

heart. Other days, the mountain life cheered him and his thoughts strayed to
Otsū.
        Coming down from the mountains, he'd gone to the Yugyōji in Fujisawa
for a few days, then on to Kamakura. It was here that he'd met Matahachi.
Determined not to return to a life of indolence, Matahachi was in Kamakura
because of the many Zen temples there, but he was suffering from an even
deeper sense of malaise than Musashi.
        Musashi reassured him, "It's not too late. If you learn self-discipline, you
can make a fresh start. It's fatal to tell yourself that it's all over, that you're no
good."
        He felt constrained to add, "To tell the truth, I myself have run up against a
wall. There are times when I wonder if I have any future. I feel completely
empty. It's like being confined in a shell. I hate myself. I tell myself I'm no good.
But by chastising myself and forcing myself to go on, I manage to kick through
the shell. Then a new path opens up before me.
        "Believe me, it's a real struggle this time. I'm floundering around inside the
shell, unable to do a thing. I came down from the mountains because I
remembered a person who I think can help me."
        The person was the priest Gudō.
        Matahachi said, "He's the one who helped you when you were first seeking
the Way, isn't he? Couldn't you introduce me and ask him to accept me as his
disciple?"
        At first, Musashi was skeptical about Matahachi's sincerity, but after
hearing of the trouble he'd been in in Edo, he decided that he really meant it. The
two of them made inquiries about Gudō at a number of Zen temples, but learned
little. Musashi knew the priest was no longer at the Myōshinji in Kyoto. He had
left several years earlier and traveled for some time in the east and northeast. He
also knew he was a most erratic man, who might be in Kyoto giving lectures on
Zen to the Emperor one day and out wandering the countryside the next. Gudō
had been known to stop several times at the Hachijōji in Okazaki, and one priest
suggested that might be the best place to wait for him.


      Musashi and Matahachi sat in the little shed where Matahachi slept.
Musashi often visited him here and they talked late into the night. Matahachi
wasn't allowed to sleep in the dormitory, which, like the other buildings of the
Hachijōji, was a rustic, thatched-roof affair, since he had not yet been officially

accepted as a priest.
      "Oh, these mosquitoes!" said Matahachi, waving away smoke from the
insect repellent, then rubbing his irritated eyes. "Let's go outside."
      They walked to the main hall and sat down on the porch. The grounds
were deserted and there was a cool breeze.
      "Reminds me of the Shippōji," said Matahachi, his voice barely audible.
"It does, doesn't it," said Musashi.
      They fell silent. They always did at times like this, thoughts of home
invariably bringing back memories of Otsū or Osugi or events neither of them
wanted to talk about for fear of upsetting their present relationship.
      But after a few moments, Matahachi said, "The hill the Shippōji was on
was higher, wasn't it? There isn't any ancient cryptomeria here, though." He
paused, stared for a time at Musashi's profile, then said diffidently, "There's a
request I've been wanting to make, but . . ."
      "What is it?"
      "Otsū—" Matahachi began, but immediately choked up. When he thought
he could manage it, he went on: "I wonder what Otsū’s doing right now, and
what will happen to her. I think of her often these days, apologizing in my heart
for what I did. I'm ashamed to admit it, but in Edo I made her live with me.
Nothing happened, though. She refused to let me touch her. I guess after I went
to Sekigahara, Otsū must have been like a fallen blossom. Now she's a flower
blooming on a different tree, in different soil." His face showed his earnestness
and his voice was grave.
      "Takezō—no ... Musashi: I beg you, marry Otsū. You're the only person
who can save her. I've never been able to bring myself to say that, but now that
I've decided to become a disciple of Gudō, I'm resigned to the fact that Otsū is
not mine. Even so I worry about her. Won't you look for her and give her the
happiness she longs for?"
      It was about three o'clock in the morning when Musashi started down the
dark mountain path. His arms were folded, his head was bowed; Matahachi's
words rang in his ears. Anguish seemed to tug at his legs. He wondered how
many nights of torment Matahachi must have spent mustering up the courage to
speak. Yet it seemed to Musashi that his own dilemma was uglier and more
painful.
      Matahachi, he thought, was hoping to flee from the flames of the past to
the cool salvation of enlightenment—trying, like a baby being born, to find in
the twofold mysterious pain of sadness and ecstasy a life worth living.

        Musashi had not been able to say, "I can't do that," much less, "I don't want
to marry Otsū. She's your fiancée. Repent, purify your heart and win her back."
In the end, he had said nothing, for anything he might have said would have
been a lie.
        Matahachi had pleaded fervently, "Unless I'm sure Otsū will be cared for,
it'll do me no good to become a disciple. You're the one who urged me to train
and discipline myself. If you're my friend, save Otsū. That's the only way to save
me."
        Musashi had been surprised when Matahachi had broken down and wept.
He hadn't suspected he was capable of such depth of feeling. And when he'd
stood up to leave, Matahachi clutched his sleeve and begged for an answer. "Let
me think about it," was all Musashi could say. Now he cursed himself for being a
coward and lamented his inability to overcome his inertia.
        Musashi thought sadly that those who have not suffered from this malady
cannot know its agony. It was not a matter merely of being idle, which is often a
pleasant state, but of wanting desperately to do something and not being able to.
Musashi's mind and eyes seemed dull and empty. Having gone as far as he could
in one direction, he found himself powerless either to retreat or to embark on a
new path. It was like being imprisoned in a place with no exit. His frustration
bred self-doubt, recrimination, tears.
        Getting angry with himself, recalling all the things he had done wrong, did
not help. It was because he was experiencing early symptoms of his ailment that
he had parted with Iori and Gonnosuke and severed ties with his friends in Edo.
But his intention to kick through the shell before it was well formed had failed.
The shell was still there, enclosing his empty self like the abandoned skin of a
cicada.
        He walked on irresolutely. The wide expanse of the Yahagi River came
into view, and the wind coming off the river felt cool on his face.
        Suddenly, warned by a piercing whistle, he leapt to one side. The shot
passed within five feet of him, and the report of a musket reverberated across the
river. Counting two breaths between the bullet and the sound, Musashi
concluded the gun had been fired from quite a distance. He jumped under the
bridge and clung batlike to a post.
        Several minutes passed before three men came running down Hachijō Hill
like pine cones driven by the wind. Near the end of the bridge, they stopped and
began searching for the body. Convinced he'd scored a hit, the musketeer threw
away the fuse. He was dressed in darker clothes than the other two and masked,

only his eyes visible.
        The sky had lightened a little and brass ornaments on the gun butt gave off
a soft glow.
        Musashi couldn't imagine who in Okazaki wanted him dead. Not that there
was any shortage of candidates. In the course of his battles, he had defeated
many men who might still burn with the desire for revenge. He had killed many
others whose families or friends might wish to pursue a vendetta.
        Any person who followed the Way of the Sword was constantly in danger
of being killed. If he survived one close call, chances were that by that very act
he made new enemies or created a new peril. Danger was the grindstone on
which the swordsman whetted his spirit. Enemies were teachers in disguise.
        To be taught by danger to be alert even when asleep, to learn from enemies
at all times, to use the sword as a means of letting people live; governing the
realm, achieving enlightenment, sharing one's joys in life with others—they were
all inherent in the Way of the Sword.
        As Musashi crouched under the bridge, the cold reality of the situation
stimulated him and his lassitude evaporated. Breathing very shallowly,
noiselessly, he let his attackers approach. Failing to find the corpse, they
searched the deserted road and the space under the end of the bridge.
        Musashi's eyes widened. Though dressed in black, like bandits, the men
carried samurai swords and were well shod. The only samurai in the district were
those serving the House of Honda in Okazaki and the Owari House of Tokugawa
in Nagoya. He was not aware of having enemies in either fief.
        One man dived into the shadows and recovered the fuse, then lit it and
waved it, leading Musashi to think there were more men across the bridge. He
couldn't move, not now anyway. If he showed himself, he would invite more
musket fire. Even if he gained the opposite bank, danger, perhaps greater danger,
lay waiting. But he couldn't stay where he was much longer, either. Knowing he
had not crossed the bridge, they would move in on him and possibly discover his
hiding place.
        His plan came to him like a flash of light. It was not reasoned out by the
theories of the Art of War, which constituted the fiber of the trained warrior's
intuition. To reason out a mode of attack was a dilatory process, often resulting
in defeat in situations where speed was of the essence. The warrior's instinct was
not to be confused with animal instinct. Like a visceral reaction, it came from a
combination of wisdom and discipline. It was an ultimate reasoning that went
beyond reason, the ability to make the right move in a split second without going

through the actual process of thinking.
      "There's no point in your trying to hide," he shouted. "If you're looking for
me, I'm right here." The wind was fairly strong now; he wasn't sure whether his
voice carried or not.
      The question was answered by another shot. Musashi, of course, was no
longer there. While the bullet was still in the air, he jumped nine feet nearer the
end of the bridge.
      He rushed into their midst. They separated slightly, facing him from three
directions but totally lacking in coordination. He struck downward at the man in
the middle with his long sword, simultaneously slicing laterally with his short
sword at the man on his left. The third man fled across the bridge, running,
stumbling and bouncing off the railing.
      Musashi followed at a walk, keeping to one side and stopping from time to
time to listen. When nothing more happened, he went home and to bed.


      The next morning two samurai appeared at his house. Finding the
entranceway full of children's sandals, they went around to the side.
      "Are you Muka Sensei?" asked one. "We're from the House of Honda."
Musashi looked up from his writing and said, "Yes, I'm Muka."
     "Is your real name Miyamoto Musashi? If it is, don't try to conceal it." "I'm
     Musashi."
     "I believe you're acquainted with Watari Shima."
     "I don't think I know him."
      "He says he's been at two or three haiku parties when you were present."
"Now that you mention it, I do remember him. We met at the house of a mutual
friend."
      "He was wondering if you wouldn't come and spend an evening with him."
      "If he's looking for someone to compose haiku with, he has the wrong
man. Though it's true I've been invited to a few such parties, I'm a simple man
with little experience in such matters."
      "I think what he has in mind is discussing the martial arts with you."
      Musashi's pupils were staring worriedly at the two samurai. For a few
moments, Musashi gazed at them too, then said, "In that case, I shall be
delighted to call on him. When?"
     "Could you come this evening?"
     "Fine."

     "He'll send a palanquin for you."
     "That's very kind of him. I'll be waiting."
       After they'd gone, he turned back to his pupils. "Come, now," he said.
"You mustn't let yourselves be distracted. Get back to work. Look at me. I'm
practicing too. You have to learn to concentrate so completely that you don't
even hear people talking or cicadas singing. If you're lazy when you're young,
you'll turn out like me and have to practice after you're grown." He laughed and
looked around at the ink-smeared faces and hands.
       By twilight, he had donned a hakama and was ready to go. Just as he was
reassuring the brush seller's wife, who looked ready to cry, that he would be safe,
the palanquin arrived—not the simple basket type seen around town but a
lacquered sedan chair, which was accompanied by two samurai and three
attendants.
     Neighbors, dazzled by the sight, crowded around and whispered. Children
     called their friends and chattered excitedly.
     "Only great people ride in palanquins like that."
     "Our teacher must be somebody."
     "Where's he going?"
     "Will he ever come back?"
     The samurai closed the door of the palanquin, cleared the people out of the
     way, and they set off.
       While not knowing what to expect, Musashi suspected there was a
connection between the invitation and the incident at Yahagi Bridge. Perhaps
Shima was going to take him to task for killing two Honda samurai. Then again,
maybe Shima was the person behind the spying and the surprise attack and was
now ready to confront Musashi openly. Not believing any good could come from
tonight's meeting, Musashi resigned himself to facing a difficult situation.
Speculation wouldn't get him very far. The Art of War demanded that he find out
where he stood and act accordingly.
       The palanquin rocked gently, like a boat at sea. Hearing the wind soughing
through the pines, he thought they must be in the forest near the north castle
wall. He did not look like a man bracing himself for an unpredictable onslaught.
Eyes half shut, he appeared to be dozing.
       After the castle gate grated open, the pace of the bearers was slower, the
samurai's tones more subdued. They passed flickering lanterns and came to the
castle buildings. When Musashi alighted, servants ushered him silently but
politely to an open pavilion. Since the blinds were rolled up on all four sides, the

breeze wafted through in pleasant waves. The lamps dimmed and flared
riotously. It did not seem like the sweltering summer night it was.
       "I am Watari Shima," said his host. He was a typical Mikawa samurai—
sturdy, virile, alert but not ostensibly so, betraying no signs of weakness.
       "I am Miyamoto Musashi." The equally simple reply was accompanied by
a bow.
       Shima returned the bow, said, "Make yourself comfortable," and
proceeded to the point without further formalities. "I'm told you killed two of our
samurai last night. Is that true?"
       "Yes, it is." Musashi stared at Shima's eyes.
       "I owe you an apology," said Shima gravely. "I heard about the incident
today when the deaths were reported. There was an investigation, of course.
Though I've known your name for a long time, I did not know until now that you
were living in Okazaki.
       "As for the attack, I was told you were fired on by a group of our men, one
of whom is a disciple of Miyake Gumbei, a martial expert of the Tōgun Style."
       Musashi, sensing no subterfuge, accepted Shima's words at face value, and
the story unfolded gradually. Gumbei's disciple was one of several Honda
samurai who had studied at the Yoshioka School. The firebrands among them
got together and decided to kill the man who had put an end to the glory of the
Yoshioka School.
       Musashi knew Yoshioka Kempō's name was still revered throughout the
country. In western Japan, particularly, it would have been difficult to find a fief
in which there were no samurai who had not studied under him. Musashi told
Shima he understood their hatred of him but regarded it as a personal grudge
rather than a legitimate reason for revenge in accordance with the Art of War.
       Shima apparently agreed. "I called the survivors in and reprimanded them.
I hope you'll forgive us and forget the matter. Gumbei, too, was very displeased.
If you don't mind, I'd like to introduce him to you. He would like to offer his
apologies."
       "That's not necessary. What happened was a common occurrence for any
man committed to the martial arts."
       "Even so—"
       "Well, let's dispense with the apologies. But if he'd like to talk about the
Way, I'd be delighted to meet him. The name is familiar."
       A man was sent for Gumbei, and when the introductions were over, the
talk turned to swords and swordsmanship.

      Musashi said, "I'd like to hear about the Tōgun Style. Did you create it?"
      "No," replied Gumbei. "I learned it from my teacher, Kawasaki
Kaginosuke, from Echizen Province. According to the manual he gave me, he
developed it while living as a hermit on Mount Hakuun in Kōzuke. He seems to
have learned many of his techniques from a Tendai monk named Tōgumbo....
But tell me about yourself. I've heard your name mentioned a number of times. I
had the impression you were older. And since you're here, I wonder if you'd
favor me with a lesson." The tone was friendly. Nevertheless, this was an
invitation to battle.
      "Some other time," Musashi replied lightly. "I should be going now. I don't
really know the way home."
      "When you go," said Shima, "I'll send someone with you."
      "When I heard two men had been cut down," Gumbei went on, "I went
over to take a look. I found I couldn't reconcile the positions of the bodies with
the wounds, so I questioned the man who escaped. His impression was that you
were using two swords at once. Could that be true?"
      With a smile, Musashi said he had never done so consciously. He regarded
what he was doing as fighting with one body and one sword.
      "You shouldn't be so modest," said Gumbei. "Tell us about it. How do you
practice? What do the weights have to be for you to use two swords freely?"
      Seeing he wasn't going to be able to leave before he gave some sort of
explanation, he directed his eyes around the room. They came to rest on two
muskets in the alcove and he asked to borrow them. Shima consented, and
Musashi went to the middle of the room holding the two weapons by the barrels,
one in each hand.
      Musashi raised one knee and said, "Two swords are as one sword. One
sword is as two swords. One's arms are separate; they both belong to the same
body. In all things, the ultimate reasoning is not dual but single. All styles and all
factions are alike in this respect. I will show you."
      The words came out spontaneously and when they stopped, he raised his
arm and said, "By your leave." Then he began twirling the muskets. They spun
around like reels, creating a small whirlwind. The other men blanched.
      Musashi stopped and drew his elbows to his sides. He walked over to the
alcove and put the muskets back. With a slight laugh, he said, "Perhaps that will
help you to understand." Offering no further explanation, he bowed to his host
and took his leave. Astounded, Shima forgot all about sending someone with
him.

       Outside the gate, Musashi turned for a final look, relieved to be out of
Watari Shima's grasp. He still did not know the man's real intentions, but one
thing was clear. Not only was his identity known; he had become involved in an
incident. The wisest thing would be to leave Okazaki this very night.
       He was thinking about his promise to Matahachi to wait for Gudō's return
when the lights of Okazaki came into view and a voice called to him from a
small roadside shrine.
     "Musashi, it's me, Matahachi. We were worried about you, so we came out
     here to wait."
     "Worried?" said Musashi.
     "We went to your house. The woman next door said people had been spying
     on you recently."
       "We?"
       "The master came back today."
       Gudō was seated on the veranda of the shrine. He was a man of unusual
mien, his skin as black as a giant cicada's, his deep-set eyes shining brilliantly
under high eyebrows. He looked to be somewhere between forty and fifty, but it
was impossible to tell with a man like this. Thin and wiry, he had a booming
voice.
       Musashi went over, knelt and lowered his forehead to the ground. Gudō
regarded him silently for a minute or two. "It's been a long time," he said.
       Lifting his head, Musashi said quietly, "A very long time." Gudō or Takuan
—Musashi had long been convinced that only one or the other of these two men
could deliver him from his present impasse. Here, at last, after a wait of a whole
year, was Gudō. He gazed at the priest's face as he might at the moon on a dark
night.
       Suddenly and forcefully, he cried out, "Sensei!"
     "What is it?" Gudō had no need to ask; he knew what Musashi wanted,
     anticipated it as a mother divines a child's needs.
     Musashi, head to the ground again, said, "It's been nearly ten years since I
     studied under you."
     "Is it that long?"
     "Yes. But even after all those years, I doubt my progress along the Way is
     measurable."
     "You still talk like a child, don't you? You couldn't have come very far."
     "I'm full of regrets."
     "Are you?"

      "My training and self-discipline have accomplished so little."
       "You're always talking about such things. So long as you do that, it's
futile." "What would happen if I gave up?"
       "You'd be tied up in knots again. You'd be human rubbish, worse off than
before, when you were merely an ignorant fool."
       "If I desert the Way, I fall into the depths. Yet when I try to pursue it to the
peak, I find I'm not up to the task. I'm twisting in the wind halfway up, neither
the swordsman nor the human being I want to be."
      "That seems to sum it up."
      "You can't know how desperate I've been. What should I do? Tell me! How
      can I free myself from inaction and confusion?"
      "Why ask me? You can only rely on yourself."
       "Let me sit at your feet again and receive your chastisement. Me and
Matahachi. Or give me a blow with your staff to awaken me from this dark
emptiness. I beg you, Sensei, help me." Musashi had not lifted his head. He shed
no tears, but his voice choked up.
       Completely unmoved, Gudō said, "Come, Matahachi," and together they
walked away from the shrine.
       Musashi ran after the priest, grabbed his sleeve, pleaded and begged.
       The priest shook his head silently. When Musashi persisted, he said, "Not
one thing!" Then, angrily: "What have I to tell you? What more have I to give
you? There is only a blow on the head." He waved his fist in the air but did not
strike.
       Musashi, letting go of his sleeve, was about to say something else. The
priest walked rapidly away, not pausing to look back.
       At Musashi's side, Matahachi said, "When I saw him at the temple and
explained our feelings and why we wanted to become his disciples, he barely
listened. When I finished, he said, 'Oh?' and told me I could follow along and
wait on him. Maybe if you just follow us, whenever he seems to be in a good
mood you can ask him what you want to ask."
       Gudō turned and called Matahachi.
       "Coming," said Matahachi. "Do what I told you," he advised Musashi as
he rushed off to catch up with the priest.
       Thinking that letting Gudō out of his sight again would be fatal, Musashi
decided to follow Matahachi's advice. In the flow of universal time, a man's life
of sixty or seventy years was only a lightning flash. If in that brief span he was
privileged to meet a man like Gudō, it would be foolish to let the chance slip by.

       "It's a sacred opportunity," he thought. Warm tears gathered at the corners
of his eyes. He had to follow Gudō, to the end of the earth if need be, pursue him
until he heard the word he longed for.
       Gudō walked away from Hachijō Hill, apparently no longer interested in
the temple there. His heart had already begun to flow with the water and the
clouds. When he reached the Tōkaidō, he turned west, toward Kyoto.
