The Soul of the Deep


      With the tide at its peak, the water coursed through the strait like a swollen
torrent in a narrow ravine. The wind was to their rear, and the boat moved
swiftly across the waves. Sasuke looked proud; he intended to be praised for his
work with the scull today.
      Musashi was seated in the middle of the boat, his knees spread wide.
"Does it take long to get there?" he asked.
      "Not very long with this tide, but we're late."
      "Mm."
     "It's well after eight o'clock."
     "Yes, it is, isn't it? What time do you think we'll get there?"
     "It'll probably be ten or a little after."
     "That's just right."
      The sky Musashi looked at that day—the sky Ganryū looked at—was a
deep azure. Snow covering the ridge of the Nagato Mountains looked like a
white streamer fluttering across a cloudless sky. The houses of the city of
Mojigasaki and the wrinkles and crevices of Mount Kazashi were clearly
discernible. On the mountainsides, droves of people were straining their eyes
toward the islands.
     "Sasuke, may I have this?"
     "What is it?"
     "This broken oar in the bottom of the boat."
     "I don't need it. Why do you want it?"
      "It's about the right size," Musashi said cryptically. He held the slightly
waterlogged oar out with one hand and squinted down it to see if it was straight.
One edge of the blade was split off.
      He placed the oar on his knee and, totally absorbed, began carving with his
short sword. Sasuke cast backward glances toward Shimonoseki several times,
but Musashi seemed oblivious of the people he had left behind. Was this the way
a samurai approached a life-and-death battle? To a townsman like Sasuke, it
seemed cold and heartless.
      Musashi finished his carving and brushed the chips from his hakama. "Do
you have something I could put around me?" he asked.

      "Are you cold?"
      "No, but the water's splashing in."
      "There should be a quilted coat under the seat."
       Musashi picked up the garment and threw it over his shoulders. Then he
took some paper from his kimono and began rolling and twisting each sheet into
a string. When he had accumulated more than twenty of these, he twisted them
together end to end to make two cords, which he then braided to make a tasuki,
the band used to tie sleeves back when fighting. Sasuke had heard that making
tasuki from paper was a secret art, passed down from generation to generation,
but Musashi made the process look easy. Sasuke watched with admiration the
deftness of his fingers and the grace with which he slipped the tasuki over his
arms.
       "Is that Funashima?" asked Musashi, pointing.
       "No. That's Hikojima, part of the Hahajima group. Funashima's a thousand
yards or so to the northeast. It's easy to recognize because it's flat and looks like
a long sandbar. There between Hikojima and Izaki is the Strait of Ondo. You've
probably heard of it."
       "To the west, then, that must be Dairinoura in Buzen Province." "That's
right."
       "I remember now. The inlets and islands around here were where
Yoshitsune won the last battle against the Heike."
       Sasuke was growing more nervous with each stroke of the scull. He had
broken out in a cold sweat; his heart was palpitating. It seemed eerie to be
talking about inconsequential matters. How could a man going into battle be so
calm?
       It would be a fight to the death; no question about that. Would he be taking
a passenger back to the mainland later? Or a cruelly maimed corpse? There was
no way of knowing. Musashi, thought Sasuke, was like a white cloud floating
across the sky.
       This was not a pose on Musashi's part, for in fact he was thinking of
nothing at all. He was, if anything, a little bored.
       He looked over the side of the boat at the swirling blue water. It was deep
here, infinitely deep, and alive with what seemed to be eternal life. But water
had no fixed, determined form. Was it not because man had a fixed, determined
form that he cannot possess eternal life? Does not true life begin only when
tangible form has been lost?
       To Musashi's eyes, life and death seemed like so much froth. He felt goose

pimples on his skin, not from the cold water but because his body felt a
premonition. Though his mind had risen above life and death, body and mind
were not in accord. When every pore of his body, as well as his mind, forgot,
there would remain nothing inside his being but the water and the clouds.
       They were passing Teshimachi Inlet on Hikojima. Unseen by them were
some forty samurai standing watch on the shore. All were supporters of Ganryū,
and most were in the service of the House of Hosokawa. In violation of
Tadatoshi's orders, they had crossed over to Funashima two days earlier. In the
event that Ganryū was beaten, they were ready to take revenge.
       This morning, when Nagaoka Sado, Iwama Kakubei and the men assigned
to stand guard arrived on Funashima, they discovered this band of samurai,
upbraided them severely and ordered them to go to Hikojima. But since most of
the officials were in sympathy with them, they went unpunished. Once they were
off Funashima, it was not the officials' responsibility what they did.
      "Are you sure it's Musashi?" one of them was saying.
      "It has to be."
      "Is he alone?"
       "He seems to be. He's got a cloak or something around his shoulders." "He
probably has on light armor and wants to hide it."
       "Let's go."
       Tensely eager for battle, they piled into their boats and lay in readiness. All
were armed with swords, but in the bottom of each boat lay a long lance.


       "Musashi's coming!"
       The cry was heard around Funashima only moments later.
       The sound of the waves, the voices of the pines and the rustling of the
bamboo grass blended softly. Since early morning the little island had had a
desolate air, despite the presence of the officials. A white cloud rising from the
direction of Nagato grazed past the sun, darkening the tree and bamboo leaves.
The cloud passed, and brightness returned.
       It was a very small island. At the north end was a low hill, covered with
pine trees. To the south the ground was level at a height about half that of the hill
until the island dropped off into the shoals.
       A canopy had been hung between some trees at a considerable distance
from the shore. The officials and their attendants waited quietly and
inconspicuously, not wishing to give Musashi the impression that they were

trying to add to the dignity of the local champion.
       Now, two hours past the appointed time, they were beginning to show their
anxiety and resentment. Twice they had sent fast boats out to hurry Musashi on.
       The lookout from the reef ran up to the officials and said, "It's him! No
doubt about it."
       "Has he really come?" asked Kakubei, rising involuntarily, and by doing so
committing a serious breach of etiquette. As an official witness, he was expected
to remain coolly reserved. His excitement was only natural, however, and was
shared by others in his party, who also stood up.
       Realizing his gaffe, Kakubei brought himself under control and motioned
to the others to sit down again. It was essential that they not allow their personal
preference for Ganryū to color their actions or their decision. Kakubei glanced
toward Ganryū's waiting area. Tatsunosuke had hung a curtain with a gentian
crest from several wild peach trees. Next to the curtain was a new wooden
bucket with a bamboo-handled ladle. Ganryū, impatient after his long wait, had
asked for a drink of water and was now resting in the shade of the curtain.
       Nagaoka Sado's position was beyond Ganryū's and slightly higher. He was
surrounded by guards and attendants, Iori at his side. When the lookout arrived
with his news, the boy's face—even his lips—turned pale. Sado was seated in
formal fashion, straight and motionless. His helmet shifted slightly to his right,
as though he were looking at the sleeve of his kimono. In a low voice, he called
Iori's name.
       "Yes, sir." Iori bowed to the ground before looking up under Sado's helmet.
Unable to control his excitement, he was trembling from head to feet.
       "Iori," said Sado, looking straight into the boy's eyes. "Watch everything
that happens. Don't miss a single thing. Keep in mind that Musashi has laid his
life on the line to teach you what you are about to see."
       Iori nodded. His eyes sparkled like flames as he fixed his gaze on the reef.
The white spray of the waves breaking against it dazzled his eyes. It was about
two hundred yards away, so it would be impossible for him to see the small
movements and the breathing of the fighters. But it was not the technical aspects
Sado wanted him to watch. It was the dramatic moment when a samurai enters a
life-and-death struggle. This was what would live on in his mind and influence
him throughout his life.
       The waves of grass rose and fell. Greenish insects darted hither and thither.
A small, delicate butterfly moved from one blade of grass to another, then was
seen no more.

       "He's nearly here," gasped Iori.
       Musashi's boat approached the reef slowly. It was almost exactly ten
o'clock.
       Ganryū stood up and walked unhurriedly down the hillock behind the
waiting stations. He bowed to the officials on his right and left and walked
quietly through the grass to the shore.
       The approach to the island was an inlet of sorts, where waves became
wavelets, then mere ripples. Musashi could see the bottom through the clear blue
water.
       "Where should I land?" asked Sasuke, who had tempered his stroke and
was scanning the shore with his eyes.
       "Go straight in." Musashi threw off the quilted coat.
       The bow advanced at a very restrained pace. Sasuke could not bring
himself to stroke with vigor; his arms moved only slightly, exerting little force.
The sound of bulbuls was in the air.
       "Sasuke."
       "Yes, sir."
       "It's shallow enough here. There's no need to get too close. You don't want
to damage your boat. Besides, it's about time for the tide to turn."
       Silently, Sasuke fixed his eyes on a tall, thin pine tree, standing alone.
Underneath it, the wind was playing with a brilliant red cloak.
       Sasuke started to point but realized that Musashi had already seen his
opponent. Keeping his eyes on Ganryū, Musashi took a russet hand towel from
his obi, folded it in four lengthwise, and tied it around his windblown hair. Then
he shifted his short sword to the front of his obi. Taking off his long sword, he
laid it in the bottom of the boat and covered it with a reed mat. In his right hand,
he held the wooden sword he had made from the broken oar.
       "This is far enough," he said to Sasuke.
       Ahead of them was nearly two hundred feet of water. Sasuke took a couple
of long strokes with the scull. The boat lurched forward and grounded on a
shoal, the keel shuddering as it rose.
       At that moment, Musashi, his hakama hitched high on both sides, jumped
lightly into the sea, landing so lightly he made barely a splash. He strode rapidly
toward the waterline, his wooden sword cutting through the spray.
       Five steps. Ten steps. Sasuke, abandoning his scull, watched in
wonderment, unconscious of where he was, what he was doing.
       As Ganryū streaked away from the pine like a red streamer, his polished

scabbard caught the glint of the sun.
       Sasuke was reminded of a silver fox tail. "Hurry!" The word flashed
through his mind, but Ganryū was already at the water's edge. Sasuke, sure that
Musashi was done for, couldn't bear to watch. He fell face down in the boat,
chilled and trembling, hiding his face as if he were the one who might at any
moment be split in two.
       "Musashi!"
       Ganryū planted his feet resolutely in the sand, unwilling to give up an
inch. Musashi stopped and stood still, exposed to the water and the wind. A hint
of a grin appeared on his face.
       "Kojirō," he said quietly. There was an unearthly fierceness in his eyes, a
force pulling so irresistibly it threatened to draw Kojirō inexorably into peril and
destruction. The waves washed his wooden sword.
       Ganryū's were the eyes that shot fire. A bloodthirsty flame burned in his
pupils, like rainbows of fierce intensity, seeking to terrify and debilitate.
"Musashi!"
      No answer.
      "Musashi!"
      The sea rumbled ominously in the distance; the tide lapped and murmured
      at the two men's feet.
       "You're late again, aren't you? Is that your strategy? As far as I'm
concerned, it's a cowardly ploy. It's two hours past the appointed time. I was here
at eight, just as I promised. I've been waiting."
       Musashi did not reply.
       "You did this at Ichijōji, and before that at the Rengeōin. Your method
seems to be to throw your opponent off by deliberately making him wait. That
trick will get you nowhere with Ganryū. Now prepare your spirit and come
forward bravely, so future generations won't laugh at you. Come ahead and fight,
Musashi!" The end of his scabbard rose high behind him as he drew the great
Drying Pole. With his left hand, he slid the scabbard off and threw it into the
water.
       Waiting just long enough for a wave to strike the reef and retreat, Musashi
suddenly said in a quiet voice, "You've lost, Kojirō."
      "What?" Ganryū was shaken to the core.
      "The fight's been fought. I say you've been defeated."
      "What are you talking about?"
      "If you were going to win, you wouldn't throw your scabbard away. You've

     cast away your future, your life."
     "Words! Nonsense!"
     "Too bad, Kojirō. Ready to fall? Do you want to get it over with fast?"
     "Come ... come forward, you bastard!"
     "H-o-o-o!" Musashi's cry and the sound of the water rose to a crescendo
     together.
       Stepping into the water, the Drying Pole positioned high above his head,
Ganryū faced Musashi squarely. A line of white foam streaked across the surface
as Musashi ran up on shore to Ganryū's left. Ganryū pursued.
       Musashi's feet left the water and touched the sand at almost the same
instant that Ganryū's sword—his whole body—hurtled at him like a flying fish.
When Musashi sensed that the Drying Pole was coming toward him, his body
was still at the end of the motion that had taken him out of the water, leaning
slightly forward.
       He held the wooden sword with both hands, extended out to the right
behind him and partially hidden. Satisfied with his position, he half grunted, an
almost noiseless sound that wafted before Ganryū's face. The Drying Pole had
appeared to be on the verge of a downward slice, but it wavered slightly, then
stopped. Nine feet away from Musashi, Ganryū changed direction by leaping
nimbly to the right.
       The two men stared at each other. Musashi, two or three paces from the
water, had the sea to his back. Ganryū was facing him, his sword held high with
both hands.
       Their lives were totally absorbed in deadly combat, and both were free
from conscious thought.
       The scene of the battle was a perfect vacuum. But in the waiting stations
and beyond the sound of the waves, countless people held their breath.
       Above Ganryū hovered the prayers and the hopes of those who believed in
him and wanted him to live, above Musashi the prayers and hopes of others. Of
Sado and Iori, on the island. Of Otsū and Osugi and Gonnosuke, on the beach at
Shimonoseki. Of Akemi and Matahachi, on their hill in Kokura.
       All their prayers were directed to heaven.
       Here, hopes, prayers and the gods were of no assistance, nor was chance.
There was only a vacuum, impersonal and perfectly impartial.
       Is this vacuum, so difficult of achievement by one who has life, the perfect
expression of the mind that has risen above thought and transcended ideas?
       The two men spoke without speaking. Then to each came the unconscious

realization of the other. The pores of their bodies stood out like needles directed
at the adversary.
       Muscles, flesh, nails, hair, even eyebrows—all bodily elements that
partake of life—were united into a single force against the enemy, defending the
living organism of which they were a part. The mind alone was one with the
universe, clear and untroubled, like the reflection of the moon in a pond amidst
the ragings of a typhoon. To reach this sublime immobility is the supreme
achievement.
       It seemed like eons, but the interval was in fact short—the time required
for the waves to come in and recede half a dozen times.
       Then a great shout—more than vocal, coming from the depths of being—
shattered the instant. It came from Ganryū, and was followed immediately by
Musashi's shout.
       The two cries, like angry waves lashing a rocky shore, sent their spirits
skyward. The challenger's sword, raised so high that it seemed to threaten the
sun, streaked through the air like a rainbow.
       Musashi threw his left shoulder forward, drew his right foot back and
shifted his upper body into a position half-facing his opponent. His wooden
sword, held in both hands, swept through the air at the same moment that the tip
of the Drying Pole came down directly before his nose.
       The breathing of the two combatants grew louder than the sound of the
waves. Now the wooden sword was extended at eye level, the Drying Pole high
above its bearer's head. Ganryū had bounded about ten paces away, where he had
the sea to one side. Though he had not succeeded in injuring Musashi in his first
attack, he had put himself in a much better position. Had he remained where he
was, with the sun reflecting from the water into his eyes, his vision would soon
have faltered, then his spirit, and he would have been at Musashi's mercy.
       With renewed confidence, Ganryū began inching forward, keeping a sharp
eye out for a chink in Musashi's defense and steeling his own spirit for a decisive
move.
       Musashi did the unexpected. Instead of proceeding slowly and cautiously,
he strode boldly toward Ganryū, his sword projecting before him, ready to thrust
into Ganryū's eyes. The artlessness of this approach brought Ganryū to a halt. He
almost lost sight of Musashi.
       The wooden sword rose straight in the air. With one great kick, Musashi
leapt high, and folding his legs, reduced his six-foot frame to four feet or less.
       "Y-a-a-ah!" Ganryū's sword screamed through the space above him. The

stroke missed, but the tip of the Drying Pole cut through Musashi's headband,
which went flying through the air.
       Ganryū mistook it for his opponent's head, and a smile flitted briefly
across his face. The next instant his skull broke like gravel under the blow of
Musashi's sword.
       As Ganryū lay where the sand met the grass, his face betrayed no
consciousness of defeat. Blood streamed from his mouth, but his lips formed a
smile of triumph.
       "Oh, no!"
       "Ganryū!"
       Forgetting himself, Iwama Kakubei jumped up, and with him all his
retinue, their faces distorted with shock. Then they saw Nagaoka Sado and Iori,
sitting calmly and sedately on their benches. Shamed, they somehow managed to
keep from running forward. They tried to regain a degree of composure, but
there was no concealing their grief and disillusion. Some swallowed hard,
refusing to believe what they had seen, and their minds went blank.
       In an instant, the island was as quiet and still as it had ever been. Only the
rustle of the pines and the swaying grasses mocked the frailty and impermanence
of mankind.
       Musashi was watching a small cloud in the sky. As he did, his soul
returned to his body, and it became possible for him to distinguish between the
cloud and himself, between his body and the universe.
       Sasaki Kojirō Ganryū did not return to the world of the living. Lying face
down, he still had a grip on his sword. His tenacity was still visible. There was
no sign of anguish on his face. Nothing but satisfaction at having fought a good
fight, not the faintest shadow of regret.
       The sight of his own headband lying on the ground sent shivers up and
down Musashi's spine. Never in this life, he thought, would he meet another
opponent like this. A wave of admiration and respect flowed over him. He was
grateful to Kojirō for what the man had given him. In strength, in the will to
fight, he ranked higher than Musashi, and it was because of this that Musashi
had been able to excel himself.
       What was it that had enabled Musashi to defeat Kojirō? Skill? The help of
the gods? While knowing it was neither of these, Musashi was never able to
express a reason in words. Certainly it was something more important than either
strength or godly providence.
       Kojirō had put his confidence in the sword of strength and skill. Musashi

trusted in the sword of the spirit. That was the only difference between them.
      Silently, Musashi walked the ten paces to Kojirō and knelt beside him. He
put his left hand near Kojirō's nostrils and found there was still a trace of breath.
"With the right treatment, he may recover," Musashi told himself. And he
wanted to believe this, wanted to believe that this most valiant of all adversaries
would be spared.
      But the battle was over. It was time to go.
      "Farewell," he said—to Kojirō, then to the officials on their benches.
Having bowed once to the ground, he ran to the reef and jumped into the boat.
There was not a drop of blood on his wooden sword.
      The tiny craft moved out to sea. Who is to say where? There is no record
as to whether Ganryū's supporters on Hikojima attempted to take revenge.
      People do not give up their loves and hates as long as life lasts. Waves of
feeling come and go with the passage of time. Throughout Musashi's lifetime,
there were those who resented his victory and criticized his conduct on that day.
He rushed away, it was said, because he feared reprisal. He was confused. He
even neglected to administer the coup de grace.
      The world is always full of the sound of waves.
      The little fishes, abandoning themselves to the waves, dance and sing and
play, but who knows the heart of the sea, a hundred feet down? Who knows its
depth?
