Shikama Blue


      "Is Otsū here?"
      "Yes, here I am."
      A face appeared above the top of the hedge.
      "You're the hemp dealer Mambei, aren't you?" said Otsū.
      "That's right. Sorry to bother you when you're busy, but I heard some news
      that might interest you."
      "Come in." She gestured toward the wooden door in the fence.
       As was evident from the cloth hanging from branches and poles, the house
belonged to one of the dyers who made the sturdy fabric known throughout the
country as "Shikama Blue." This involved immersing the cloth in indigo dye
several times and pounding it in a large mortar after each immersion. The thread
became so saturated with dye that it wore out long before it faded.
       Otsū was not yet used to handling the mallet, but she worked hard and her
fingers were stained blue. In Edo, after learning Musashi was gone, she had
called at the Hōjō and Yagyū residences, then immediately set out on her search
again. In Sakai the previous summer, she boarded one of Kobayashi
Tarōzaemon's ships and came to Shikama, a fishing village situated on the
triangular estuary where the Shikama River flows into the Inland Sea.
       Remembering that her wet nurse was married to a dyer from Shikama,
Otsū had looked her up and was living with her. Since the family was poor, Otsū
felt obliged to help with the dyeing, which was the work of the young unmarried
women. They often sang as they worked, and villagers said they could tell from
the sound of a girl's voice whether she was in love with one of the young
fishermen.
      Having washed her hands and wiped the sweat from her forehead, Otsū
      invited Mambei to sit down and rest on the veranda.
      He declined with a wave of his hand and said, "You came from the village
      of Miyamoto, didn't you?"
      "Yes."
      "I go up that way on business, to buy hemp, and the other day I heard a
      rumor...."
      "Yes?"

      "About you."
      "Me?"
      "I also heard something about a man named Musashi."
      "Musashi?" Otsū’s heart was in her throat and her cheeks flushed.
       Mambei gave a little laugh. Though it was autumn, the sun was still fairly
strong. He folded a hand towel, put it on his head and squatted on his heels. "Do
you know a woman named Ogin?" he asked.
       "You mean Musashi's sister?"
       Mambei nodded vigorously. "I ran into her at Mikazuki Village in Sayo. I
happened to mention your name. She looked very surprised."
      "Did you tell her where I was?"
      "Yes. I didn't see any harm in that."
      "Where's she living now?"
       "She's staying with a samurai named Hirata—a relative of hers, I think.
She said she'd like very much to see you. She said several times how much she
missed you, how much she had to tell you. Some of it was secret, she said. I
thought she was going to start crying."
       Otsū's eyes reddened.
       "There in the middle of the road was no place to write a letter, of course,
so she asked me to tell you to come to Mikazuki. She said she'd like to come
here, but couldn't just now." Mambei paused. "She didn't go into details, but she
said she'd had word from Musashi." He added that he was going to Mikazuki the
next day and suggested she go with him.
       Though Otsū’s mind was made up right then, she felt she should talk it
over with the dyer's wife. "I'll let you know this evening," she said.
       "Fine. If you decide to go, we should get an early start." With the sea
murmuring in the background, his voice sounded particularly loud, and even
Otsū's soft reply seemed rather shrill.
       As Mambei went out the gate, a young samurai who had been sitting on
the beach rubbing a handful of sand stood up and watched him with piercing
eyes, as if to verify his thoughts about the man. Handsomely attired and wearing
a straw basket hat shaped like a ginkgo leaf, he appeared to be eighteen or
nineteen years old. When the hemp dealer was out of sight, he turned and stared
at the dyer's house.
       Despite the excitement caused by Mambei's news, Otsū picked up her
mallet and resumed her work. The sounds of other mallets, accompanied by
singing, floated through the air. No sound came from Otsū’s lips when she

worked, but in her heart was a song of her love for Musashi. Now she silently
whispered a poem from an ancient collection:


           Since our first meeting,
           My love has been more profound
           Than that of others,
           Though it matches not the hues
           Of the cloth from Shikama.


      She felt sure that if she visited Ogin, she would learn where Musashi was.
And Ogin was a woman too. It would be easy to tell her her feelings.
      The beats of her mallet slowed to an almost languid pace. Otsū was
happier than she had been for a long time. She understood the feelings of the
poet. Often the sea seemed melancholy and alien; today it was dazzling, and the
waves, though gentle, appeared to be bursting with hope.
      She hung the cloth on a high drying pole and, heart still singing, wandered
out through the open gate. Out of the corner of her eyes, she caught sight of the
young samurai strolling unhurriedly along the water's edge. She had no idea who
he was, but somehow he held her attention, and she noticed nothing else, not so
much as a bird riding the salty breeze.
      Their destination was not very far; even a woman could walk the distance
with little difficulty, stopping over once on the way. It was nearly noon now. "I'm
sorry to put you to all this trouble," said Otsū.
     "No trouble. You seem to have good walking legs," said Mambei. "I'm used
     to traveling."
     "I heard you've been to Edo. That's quite a journey for a woman traveling
     alone."
     "Did the dyer's wife tell you that?"
      "Yes. I've heard everything. The people in Miyamoto talk about it too."
"Oh, they would," said Otsū with a little frown. "It's so embarrassing." "You
shouldn't feel embarrassed. If you love a person that much, who's to say whether
you're to be pitied or congratulated. But it seems to me this Musashi is a little
coldhearted."
     "Oh, he's not—not at all."
     "You don't resent the way he's acted?"

      "I'm the one to blame. His training and discipline are his only interest in
      life, and I can't resign myself to that."
      "I don't see anything wrong with the way you feel."
      "But it seems to me I've caused him a lot of trouble."
      "Hmph. My wife should hear that. That's the way women ought to be." "Is
      Ogin married?" asked Otsū.
      "Ogin? Oh, I'm not quite sure," said Mambei, and changed the subject.
      "There's a teahouse. Let's rest awhile."
       They went inside and ordered tea to go with their box lunches. As they
were finishing, some passing grooms and porters called out in familiar tones to
Mambei.
       "Hey, you, why don't you drop in on the game in Handa today?
Everybody's complaining—you left with all our money the other day."
       In some confusion, he shouted back, as though he hadn't understood them,
"I don't have any use for your horses today." Then quickly, to Otsū, "Shall we be
going?"
       As they hurried out of the shop, one of the grooms said, "No wonder he's
giving us the brush-off. Take a look at the girl!"
       "I'm going to tell your old woman on you, Mambei."
       They heard more comments of this sort as they walked quickly on ahead.
Asaya Mambei's shop in Shikama was certainly not among the more prominent
business establishments there. He bought hemp in the nearby villages and
parceled it out to the fishermen's wives and daughters to make into sails, nets
and other things. But he was the proprietor of his own enterprise, and his being
on such friendly terms with common porters struck Otsū as strange.
       As if to dispel her unspoken doubts, Mambei said, "What can you do with
riffraff like that? Just because I do them the favor of asking them to carry stuff
from the mountains, that's no reason for them to get familiar!"
       They spent the night in Tatsuno, and when they left the next morning,
Mambei was as kind and solicitous as ever. By the time they reached Mikazuki,
it was getting dark in the foothills.
       "Mambei," asked Otsū anxiously, "isn't this Mikazuki? If we cross the
mountain we'll be in Miyamoto." She had heard that Osugi was in Miyamoto
again.
       Mambei halted. "Why, yes, it's just on the other side. Does it make you
homesick?"
       Otsū lifted her eyes to the black, wavy crest of the mountains and the

evening sky. The area seemed very desolate, as if somehow the people who
should be there were missing.
       "It's only a little farther," said Mambei, walking on ahead. "Are you tired?"
       "Oh, no. Are you?"
       "No. I'm used to this road. I come this way all the time."
       "Just where is Ogin's house?"
       "Over that way," he replied, pointing. "She's sure to be waiting for us."
        They walked a little faster. When they reached the place where the slope
became steeper, there was a scattering of houses. This was a stopover on the
Tatsuno highroad. It was hardly large enough to be described as a town, but it
boasted a cheap "one-tray" eating place, where grooms hung out, and a few low-
priced inns strung out on both sides of the road.
        Once they were past the village, Mambei declared, "We have to climb a
little now." Turning off the road, he started up a steep flight of stone stairs
leading to the local shrine.
        Like a small bird chirping because of a sudden drop in the temperature,
Otsū sensed something out of the ordinary. "Are you sure we haven't come the
wrong way? There're no houses around here," she said.
        "Don't worry. It's a lonely place, but you just sit down and rest on the
shrine porch. I'll go and fetch Ogin."
        "Why should you do that?"
        "Have you forgotten? I'm sure I mentioned it. Ogin said there might be
guests it would be inconvenient for you to run into. Her house is on the other
side of this grove. I'll be back very soon." He hurried off along a narrow path
through the dark cryptomerias.
        As the evening sky grew darker, Otsū began to feel distinctly ill at ease.
Dead leaves stirred by the wind came to rest in her lap. Idly she picked one up
and turned it around in her fingers. Foolishness or purity—something made her
the perfect picture of virginity.
       A loud cackling came suddenly from behind the shrine. Otsū jumped to the
       ground.
       "Don't move, Otsū!" commanded a hoarse, scary voice.
       Otsū gasped and put her hands over her ears.
        Several shadowy shapes came from behind the shrine and surrounded her
quaking form. Though her eyes were shut, she could clearly see one of them,
more frightening and seemingly larger than the others, the white-haired hag she
had so often seen in nightmares.

      "Thank you, Mambei," said Osugi. "Now gag her before she starts
screaming and take her to Shimonoshō. Be quick about it!" She spoke with the
fearsome authority of the King of Hell condemning a sinner to the inferno.
      The four or five men were apparently village toughs having some
connection with Osugi's clan. Shouting their assent, they went at Otsū like
wolves fighting over prey and tied her up so that only her legs were free.
      "Take the shortcut."
      "Move!"
      Osugi remained behind to settle with Mambei. As she fished the money
from her obi, she said, "Good of you to bring her. I was afraid you might not be
able to manage it." Then she added, "Don't say a word to anybody."
      With a satisfied look, Mambei tucked the money into his sleeve. "Oh, it
wasn't so hard," he said. "Your plan worked just fine."
     "Ah, that was something to see. Frightened, wasn't she?"
     "She couldn't even run. Just stood there. Ha, ha. But maybe ... it was rather
     wicked of us."
     "What's wicked about it? If you only knew what I've been through." "Yes,
     yes; you told me all about it."
     "Well, I can't be wasting time here. I'll see you again one of these days.
     Come visit us in Shimonoshō."
     "Be careful. That path's not easy walking," he called over his shoulder as he
     started back down the long, dark steps.
     Hearing a gasp, Osugi whirled and shouted, "Mambei! Was that you?
     What's wrong?"
     There was no answer.
      Osugi ran to the top of the steps. She let out a little cry, then swallowed her
breath as she squinted at the shadow standing beside the fallen body and the
sword, dripping blood, slanting downward from the shadow's hand.
     "Wh-who's there?"
     There was no reply.
     "Who are you?" Her voice was dry and strained, but the years had not
     diminished her blustering bravado.
     The man's shoulders shook slightly with laughter. "It's me, you old hag."
     "Who are you?"
     "Don't you recognize me?"
     "I never heard your voice before. A robber, I suppose."
     "No robber'd bother with an old woman as poor as you."

      "But you've been keeping an eye on me, haven't you?"
      "I have."
      "On me?"
      "Why ask twice? I wouldn't come all the way to Mikazuki to kill Mambei. I
      come to teach you a lesson."
       "Ech?" It sounded as though Osugi's windpipe had burst. "You've got the
wrong person. Who are you anyway? My name is Osugi. I'm the dowager of the
Hon'iden family."
       "Oh, how good to hear you say that! It brings back all my hatred. Witch!
Have you forgotten Jōtarō?"
       "Jō-jō-tarō?"
       "In three years, a newborn babe ceases to be a baby and becomes a three-
year-old. You're an old tree; I'm a sapling. Sorry to say, you can't treat me like a
sniveling brat anymore."
       "Surely it can't be true. Are you really Jōtarō?"
       "You ought to have to pay for all the grief you've caused my teacher over
the years. He avoided you only because you're old and he didn't want to harm
you. You took advantage of that, traveling around everywhere, even to Edo,
spreading malicious rumors about him and acting as though you had a legitimate
reason to take revenge on him. You even went so far as to prevent his
appointment to a good post."
       Osugi was silent.
       "Your spite didn't end there, either. You bedeviled Otsū and tried to injure
her. I thought at last you'd given up and retired to Miyamoto. But you're still at
it, using that Mambei to carry out some scheme against Otsū."
       Still Osugi did not speak.
       "Don't you ever tire of hating? It'd be easy to slice you in two, but
fortunately for you, I'm no longer the son of a wayward samurai. My father,
Aoki Tanzaemon, has returned to Himeji and, since last spring, is serving the
House of Ikeda. To avoid bringing dishonor on him, I shall refrain from killing
you."
       Jōtarō took a couple of steps toward her. Not knowing whether to believe
him or not, Osugi moved back and cast about for a way to escape. Thinking she
saw one, she bolted toward the path the men had taken. Jōtarō caught up with
her in one leap and grabbed her by the neck.
       She opened her mouth wide and cried, "What do you think you're doing?"
She turned around and drew her sword in the same motion, struck at him and

missed.
       While dodging, Jōtarō pushed her violently forward. Her head struck hard
against the ground.
       "So you've learned a thing or two, have you?" she moaned, her face half
buried in the grass. She seemed unable to dislodge from her mind the idea that
Jōtarō was still a child.
       With a growl, he placed his foot on her spine, which seemed very fragile,
and pitilessly wrenched her arm around her back.
       Dragging her in front of the shrine, he pinned her down with his foot, but
couldn't decide what to do with her.
       There was Otsū to think about. Where was she? He had come to know of
her presence in Shikama largely by accident, though it may have been because
their karmas were intertwined. Along with his father's reinstatement, Jōtarō had
been given an appointment. It was while he was on one of his errands that he had
caught a glimpse through a gap in the fence of a woman who looked like Otsū.
Returning to the beach two days ago, he had verified his impression.
       While he was grateful to the gods for leading him to Otsū, his long-
dormant hatred of Osugi for the way she had persecuted Otsū had been
rekindled. If the old woman was not disposed of, it would be impossible for Otsū
to live in peace. The temptation was there. But killing her would embroil his
father in a dispute with a family of country samurai. They were troublesome
people at the best of times; if offended by a daimyō's direct vassal, they were
certain to cause trouble.
       Finally, he decided the best way was to punish Osugi quickly and then turn
his attention to rescuing Otsū.
       "I know the place for you," he said. "Come along."
       Osugi clung fiercely to the ground, despite his attempts to yank her along.
Seizing her by the waist, he carried her under his arm around to the back of the
shrine. The hillside had been shaved off when the shrine was built, and there was
a small cave there, the entrance to which was just big enough for a person to
crawl through.


      Otsū could see a single light in the distance. Otherwise, everything was
pitch black—mountains, fields, streams, Mikazuki Pass, which they had just
crossed by a rocky path. The two men in front were leading her by a rope, as
they would a criminal.

       When they neared the Sayo River, the man behind her said, "Stop a
minute. What do you suppose happened to the old woman? She said she'd be
right along."
       "Yeah; she should have caught up by now."
       "We could stop here a few minutes. Or go on to Sayo and wait at the
teahouse. They're probably all in bed, but we could wake them up."
       "Let's go there and wait. We can have a cup or two of sake."
       They searched along the river for a shallow place and had started to cross
when they heard a voice hailing them from a distance. It came again a minute or
two later, from much nearer.
      "The old woman?"
      "No; it sounds like a man's voice."
      "It can't have anything to do with us."
       The water was as chillingly cold as a sword blade, especially for Otsū. By
the time they heard the sound of running feet, their pursuer was almost upon
them. With great splashes, he beat them to the other bank and confronted them.
      "Otsū?" called Jōtarō.
      Shivering from the spray of water that had fallen on them, the three men
      closed in around Otsū and stood where they were.
      "Don't move," shouted Jōtarō, arms outstretched.
      "Who are you?"
      "Never mind. Release Otsū!"
      "You crazy? Don't you know you can get killed meddling in other people's
      business?"
      "Osugi said you're to hand Otsū over to me."
      "You're lying through your teeth." All three men laughed.
       "I'm not. Look at this." He held out a piece of tissue paper with Osugi's
handwriting on it. The message was short: "Things went wrong. There's nothing
you can do. Give Otsū to Jōtarō, then come back for me."
      The men, brows wrinkled, looked up at Jōtarō and moved onto the bank.
      "Can't you read?" taunted Jōtarō.
      "Shut up. I suppose you're Jōtarō."
      "That's right. My name is Aoki Jōtarō."
       Otsū had been staring fixedly at him, trembling slightly from fear and
doubt. Now, scarcely knowing what she was doing, she screamed, gasped and
stumbled forward.
       The man closest to Jōtarō shouted, "Her gag's come loose. Tighten it!"

Then menacingly to Jōtarō: "This is the old woman's handwriting, no doubt
about it. But what happened to her? What does she mean, 'come back for me'?"
       "She's my hostage," Jōtarō said loftily. "You give me Otsū, I tell you where
she is."
       The three men looked at each other. "Are you trying to be funny?" asked
one man. "Do you know who we are? Any samurai in Himeji, if that's where
you're from, should be familiar with the House of Hon'iden in Shimonoshō."
       "Yes or no—answer! If you don't surrender Otsū, I'll leave the old woman
where she is until she starves to death."
       "You little bastard!"
       One man grabbed Jōtarō and another unsheathed his sword and took a
stance. The first growled, "You keep talking nonsense like that and I'll break
your neck. Where's Osugi?"
       "Will you give me Otsū?"
       "No!"
       "Then you won't find out. Hand over Otsū, and we can put an end to this
without anybody getting hurt."
       The man who had grabbed Jōtarō's arm pulled him forward and tried to
trip him.
       Using his adversary's strength, Jōtarō threw him over his own shoulder.
But the next second, he was sitting on his behind, clutching at his right thigh.
The man had whipped out his sword and struck in a mowing motion.
Fortunately, the wound was not deep. Jōtarō jumped to his feet at the same time
as his attacker. The other two men moved in on him.
       "Don't kill him. We have to take him alive if we're to get Osugi back."
       Jōtarō quickly lost his reluctance to become involved in bloodshed. In the
ensuing melee, the three men managed at one point to throw him to the ground.
He uttered a roar and used the same tactic that moments before had been used
against him. Ripping out his short sword, he jabbed straight through the belly of
the man about to fall on him. Jōtarō's hand and arm, halfway up to the shoulder,
came away as red as if he'd stuck them into a barrel of plum vinegar, but his
head was cleared of everything save the instinct for self-preservation.
       On his feet again, he shouted and struck downward at the man in front of
him. The blade hit a shoulder bone, and glancing sideways, tore off a slice of
meat the size of a fish fillet. Screaming, the man grabbed for his sword, but it
was too late.
       "Sons of bitches! Sons of bitches!" Shouting with each stroke of his sword,

Jōtarō held off the other two, then managed to seriously wound one of them.
       They had taken their superiority for granted, but now they lost self-control
and started swinging their arms with utter abandon.
       Beside herself, Otsū ran around in circles, wriggling her bound hands
frantically. "Somebody come! Save him!" But her words were soon lost,
drowned by the sound of the river and the voice of the wind.
       Suddenly she realized that instead of calling for help, she should be relying
on her own strength. With a little cry of desperation, she sank to the ground and
began rubbing the rope against the sharp edge of a rock. It was only loosely
woven straw rope picked up by the wayside and she was soon able to free
herself.
       She picked up some rocks and ran straight toward the action. "Jōtarō," she
called, as she threw a rock at the face of one man. "I'm here too. It's going to be
all right!" Another rock. "Keep it up!" Still another rock, but like the first two, it
missed its target. She rushed back to get more.
       "That bitch!" In two leaps, one man disengaged himself from Jōtarō and
took after Otsū. He was about to bring the blunt edge of his sword down on her
back when Jōtarō reached him. Jōtarō drove his sword so deep into the small of
the man's back that the blade pointed straight out from the man's navel.
       The other man, wounded and dazed, started to slink away, then broke into
an unsteady run.
       Jōtarō planted his feet firmly on either side of the corpse, withdrew the
sword and screamed, "Stop!"
       As he started to give chase, Otsū pounced forcefully on him and screamed,
"Don't do it! You mustn't attack a badly wounded man when he's fleeing." The
fervency of her plea astonished him. He could not imagine what psychological
quirk would move her to sympathize with a man who had so recently been
tormenting her.
       Otsū said, "I want to hear what you've been doing all these years. I have
things to tell you too. And we should get out of here as fast as we can."
       Jōtarō agreed quickly, knowing that if word of the incident reached
Shimonoshō, the Hon'idens would round up the whole village to come after
them.
       "Can you run, Otsū?"
       "Yes. Don't worry about me."
       And run they did, on and on through the darkness until their breath gave
out. To both, it seemed like the old days when they had been a young girl and a

mere boy, making their way together.


       At Mikazuki, the only lights visible were at the inn. One shone in the main
building, where only a little earlier a group of travelers—a metal merchant
whose business took him to the local mines, a thread salesman from Tajima, an
itinerant priest—had been sitting around, talking and laughing. They had all
drifted off to bed.
       Jōtarō and Otsū sat talking by the other light, in a small detached room
where the innkeeper's mother lived with her spinning wheel and the pots in
which she boiled silkworms. The innkeeper suspected the couple he was taking
in were eloping, but he had the room straightened up for them anyway.
       Otsū was saying, "So you didn't see Musashi in Edo either." She gave him
an account of the last few years.
       Saddened to hear that she had not seen Musashi since that day on the Kiso
highroad, Jōtarō found it difficult to speak. Yet he thought he was able to offer a
ray of hope.
       "It's not much to go on," he said, "but I heard a rumor in Himeji that
Musashi would be coming there soon."
       "To Himeji? Could it be true?" she asked, eager to latch on to even the
flimsiest straw.
       "It's only what people say, but the men in our fief are talking as though it's
already decided. They say he'll pass through on his way to Kokura, where he's
promised to meet a challenge from Sasaki Kojirō. That's one of Lord
Hosokawa's retainers."
       "I heard something like that too, but I couldn't find anybody who had
heard from Musashi or even knew where he was."
       "Well, the word going around Himeji Castle is probably reliable. It seems
the Hanazono Myōshinji in Kyoto, which has close connections with the House
of Hosokawa, informed Lord Hosokawa of Musashi's whereabouts, and Nagaoka
Sado—he's a senior retainer—delivered the letter of challenge to Musashi."
       "Is it supposed to happen soon?"
       "I don't know. Nobody seems to know exactly. But if it's to be in Kokura,
and if Musashi's in Kyoto, he'll pass through Himeji on the way."
       "He might go by boat "
       Jōtarō shook his head. "I don't think so. The daimyō at Himeji and
Okayama and other fiefs along the Inland Sea will ask him to stop over for a

night or so. They want to see what kind of man he really is and sound him out
about whether he's interested in a position. Lord Ikeda wrote to Takuan. Then he
made inquiries at the Myōshinji and instructed the wholesalers in his area to
report if they see anyone answering Musashi's description."
       "That's all the more reason to suppose he won't go by land. There's nothing
he hates worse than a lot of fuss. If he knows about it, he'll do his best to avoid
it." Otsū seemed depressed, as if she'd suddenly lost all hope. "What do you
think, Jōtarō?" she asked pleadingly. "If I went to the Myōshinji, do you think I'd
be able to find out anything?"
      "Well, maybe, but you have to remember it's only gossip."
      "But there must be something to it, don't you think?"
      "Do you feel like going to Kyoto?"
      "Oh, yes. I'd like to leave right away.... Well, tomorrow."
       "Don't be in such a hurry. That's why you're always missing Musashi. The
minute you hear a rumor, you accept it as fact and go flying off. If you want to
spot a nightingale, you have to look at a point in front of where its voice comes
from. It seems to me you're always trailing along behind Musashi, rather than
anticipating where he might be next."
       "Well, maybe, but love's not logical." Not having stopped to think of what
she was saying, she was surprised to see his face go crimson at the mention of
the word "love." Recovering quickly, she said, "Thank you for the advice. I'll
think it over."
      "Do that, but in the meantime, come back to Himeji with me."
      "All right."
      "I want you to come to our house."
      Otsū was silent.
       "From the way my father talks, I guess he knew you fairly well until you
left the Shippōji.... I don't know what he has in mind, but he said he'd like to see
you once more and talk with you."
      The candle was threatening to go out. Otsū turned and looked out under the
      tattered eaves at the sky. "Rain," she said.
      "Rain? And we have to walk to Himeji tomorrow."
      "What's an autumn shower? We'll wear rain hats."
      "I'd like it better if it was fair."
       They closed the wooden rain shutters, and the room soon became very
warm and humid. Jōtarō was acutely conscious of Otsū’s feminine fragrance.
       "Go to bed," he said. "I'll sleep over here." Placing a wooden pillow under

the window, he lay down on his side, facing the wall.
       "Aren't you asleep yet?" grumbled Jōtarō. "You should go to bed." He
pulled the thin covers over his head, but tossed and turned awhile longer before
falling into a deep slumber.
