The Circle


       The Zen master's approach to travel was whimsically eccentric. One day
when it rained he stayed inside the inn all day and had Matahachi give him a
moxa treatment. In Mino Province, he stopped over at the Daisenji for seven
days and then spent a few days at a Zen temple in Hikone, so it was only
gradually that they approached Kyoto.
       Musashi slept wherever he could find a place. When Gudō stayed at an inn
he spent the night either outdoors or at another inn. If the priest and Matahachi
were stopping at a temple, Musashi took shelter under the gate. Privations were
as nothing compared to his need for a word from Gudō.
       One night outside a temple by Lake Biwa, suddenly aware of the coming
of autumn, he took a look at himself and saw that he resembled nothing so much
as a beggar. His hair, of course, was a rat's nest, since he'd resolved not to comb
it until the priest relented. It was weeks since he'd had a bath and a shave. His
clothes were quickly being reduced to tatters; they felt like pine bark rubbing
against his skin.
       The stars seemed ready to fall from the sky. He looked at his reed mat and
thought: "What a fool I am!" All at once, his attitude appeared insane. He
laughed bitterly. He'd stuck to his goal doggedly, silently, but what was it he was
seeking from the Zen master? Was it impossible to go through life without
torturing himself so? He even began to feel sorry for the lice inhabiting his body.
       Gudō had stated unequivocally that he had "not one thing" to offer. It was
unreasonable to press him for something he did not possess, wrong to resent
him, even though he showed less consideration than he might have for a stray
dog along the wayside.
       Musashi gazed upward through the hair hanging over his eyes. No doubt
about it—it was an autumn moon. But the mosquitoes. His skin, already
peppered with red welts, was no longer sensitive to their bites.
       He was quite prepared to admit to himself that there was something he did
not understand, but he thought of it as being one thing. If only he could figure
out what it was, his sword would be released from its bonds. Everything else
would be solved in an instant. Then just as he felt on the verge of grasping it, it
always eluded him.

       If his pursuit of the Way was to end here, he would prefer to die, for he
saw nothing else to live for. He stretched out under the roof of the gate. When
sleep would not come, he asked what it could be. A sword technique? No; not
only that. A secret for getting on in the world? No; more than that. A solution to
the problem of Otsū? No; no man could be this miserable over the love of a
woman. It had to be one all-encompassing answer, yet for all its magnitude, it
could, at the same time, be no larger than a poppy seed.
       Wrapped in his matting, he looked like a caterpillar. He wondered if
Matahachi was sleeping well. Comparing himself with his friend, he felt
envious. Matahachi's problems did not seem to disable him. Musashi always
seemed to be searching out new problems with which to torture himself.
       His eyes fell on a plaque hanging on a gatepost. He got up and went up to
it for a closer look. By the light of the moon, he read:


           I beg you, try to find the fundamental source.
           Pai-yün was moved by the merits of Pai-ch'ang;
           Hu-ch'iu sighed over the teachings left by Pai-yün.
           Like our great predecessors,
           Do not merely pinch off the leaves
           Or concern yourselves only with the branches.


       It appeared to be a quotation from the Testament of Daitō Kokushi, the
founder of the Daitokuji.
       Musashi reread the last two lines. Leaves and branches ... How many
people were thrown off course by irrelevant matters? Was he himself not an
example? While the thought seemed to lighten his burden, his doubts would not
go away. Why would his sword not obey him? Why did his eyes wander from
his goal? What prevented him from achieving serenity?
       Somehow it all seemed so unnecessary. He knew that it was when one had
pursued the Way as far as possible that vacillation set in and one was attacked by
fretfulness—leaves and branches. How did one break through the cycle? How
did one get at the core and destroy it?


           I laugh at my ten-year pilgrimage—

           Wilted robe, tattered hat, knocking at Zen gates.
           In reality, the Buddha's Law is simple:
           Eat your rice, drink your tea, wear your clothes.


        Musashi recalled this verse written by Gudō in self-mockery. Gudō had
been about the same age Musashi was now when he composed it.
        On Musashi's first visit to the Myōshinji, the priest had all but kicked him
away from the door. "What strange line of thinking leads you to my house?" he
had shouted. But Musashi persisted, and later, after he'd gained admittance,
Gudō regaled him with this ironic verse. And he laughed at him, saying the same
thing he had said a few weeks ago: "You're always talking.... It's futile."
        Thoroughly disheartened, Musashi gave up the idea of sleep and walked
around the gate, just in time to see two men emerge from the temple.
        Gudō and Matahachi were walking at an unusually rapid pace. Perhaps an
urgent summons had come from the Myōshinji, the head temple of Gudō's sect.
In any event, he brushed past the monks gathered to see him off and headed
straight for the Kara Bridge in Seta.
        Musashi followed, through the town of Sakamoto, which was asleep, the
woodblock print shops, the greengrocer's, even the bustling inns, all tightly
shuttered. The only presence was the ghostly moon.
        Leaving the town, they climbed Mount Hiei, past the Miidera and the
Sekiji in their veils of mist. They met almost no one. When they reached the
pass, Gudō stopped and said something to Matahachi. Below them lay Kyoto, in
the other direction the tranquil expanse of Lake Biwa. Aside from the moon
itself, everything was like mica, a sea of soft silvery mist.
        Reaching the pass a few moments later, Musashi was startled to find
himself only a few feet from the master. Their eyes met for the first time in
weeks. Gudō said nothing.
        Musashi said nothing.
        "Now ... it has to be now," thought Musashi. If the priest got as far as the
Myōshinji, it might be necessary to wait many weeks for the opportunity to see
him again.
        "Please, sir," he said. His chest swelled and his neck twisted. His voice
sounded like that of a frightened child, attempting to tell his mother something
he really did not want to say. He edged forward timidly.
        The priest did not condescend to ask what he wanted. His face might have

belonged to a dry-lacquer statue. The eyes alone stood out whitely, glaring
angrily at Musashi.
       "Please, sir." Musashi, oblivious of everything save the flaming impulse
propelling him forward, fell to his knees and bowed his head. "One word of
wisdom. Just one word . . ."
       He waited for what seemed like hours. When he was unable to restrain
himself any longer, he started to renew his plea.
       "I've heard all that," Gudō interrupted. "Matahachi talks about you every
night. I know all there is to know, even about the woman."
       The words were like slivers of ice. Musashi could not have lifted his head
if he had wanted to.
       "Matahachi, a stick!"
       Musashi shut his eyes, steeling himself for the blow, but instead of
striking, Gudō drew a circle around him. Without another word, he threw the
stick away and said, "Let's go, Matahachi y' They walked away quickly.
       Musashi was incensed. After the weeks of cruel mortification he'd
undergone in a sincere effort to receive a teaching, Gudō's refusal was far more
than a lack of compassion. It was heartless, brutal. He was toying with a man's
life. "Swine of a priest!"
       Musashi glared viciously at the departing pair, his lips set tightly in an
angry scowl.
       "Not one thing." Reflecting on Gudō's words, he decided they were
deceitful, suggesting the man had something to offer when in fact there was "not
one thing" in his foolish head.
       "Wait and see," thought Musashi. "I don't need you!" He would rely on no
one. In the final analysis, there was no one to rely on but himself. He was a man,
just as Gudō was a man and all the earlier masters had been men.
       He stood up, half lifted by his own rage. For several minutes, he stared at
the moon, but as his anger cooled, his eyes fell to the circle. Still inside it, he
turned all the way around. As he did so, he remembered the stick that had not
struck him.
       "A circle? What could it mean?" He let his thoughts flow.
       A perfectly round line, no beginning, no end, no deviation. If expanded
infinitely, it would become the universe. If contracted, it would become coequal
with the infinitesimal dot in which his soul resided. His soul was round. The
universe was round. Not two. One. One entity—himself and the universe.
       With a click, he drew his sword and held it out diagonally. His shadow

resembled the symbol for "o" []. The universal circle remained the same. By
the same token, he himself was unchanged. Only the shadow had changed.
      "Only a shadow," he thought. "The shadow is not my real self." The wall
against which he had been beating his head was a mere shadow, the shadow of
his confused mind.
      He raised his head and a fierce shout broke from his lips.
      With his left hand, he held out his short sword. The shadow changed again,
but the image of the universe—not by one whit. The two swords were but one.
And they were part of the circle.
      He sighed deeply; his eyes had been opened. Looking up at the moon
again, he saw that its great circle could be regarded as identical with the sword
or with the soul of one who treads the earth.
      "Sensei!" he cried, bounding off after Gudō. He sought nothing more from
the priest, but he owed him an apology for having hated him with such
vehemence.
      After a dozen steps, he halted. "It's only leaves and branches," he thought.
