The Pioneers


       On the day near the end of the fifth month when Osugi arrived in Edo, the
air was steamingly sultry, the way it was only when the rainy season failed to
bring rain. In the nearly two months since she had left Kyoto, she had traveled at
a leisurely pace, taking time to pamper her aches and pains or to visit shrines and
temples.
       Her first impression of the shōgun's capital was distasteful. "Why build
houses in a swamp like this?" she remarked disdainfully. "The weeds and rushes
haven't even been cleared away yet."
       Because of the unseasonable drought, a pall of dust hung over the
Takanawa highroad, with its newly planted trees and recently erected milestones.
The stretch from Shioiri to Nihombashi was crowded with oxcarts loaded with
rocks or lumber. All along the way, new houses were going up at a furious clip.
       "Of all the—!" gasped Osugi, looking up angrily at a half-finished house.
A gob of wet clay from a plasterer's trowel had accidentally landed on her
kimono.
       The workmen exploded with laughter.
       "How dare you throw mud on people and then stand there laughing? You
should be on your knees, apologizing!"
       Back in Miyamoto, a few sharp words from her would have had her
tenants or any of the other villagers cowering. These laborers, among the
thousands of newcomers from all over the country, barely looked up from their
work.
       "What's the old hag babbling about?" a worker asked.
       Osugi, incensed, shouted, "Who said that? Why, you . . ."
       The more she sputtered, the harder they laughed. Spectators began to
gather, asking each other why the old woman wasn't acting her age and taking
the matter in stride.
       Storming into the house, Osugi seized the end of the plank the plasterers
were standing on and yanked it off its supports. Men and buckets full of wet clay
clattered to the floor.
      "You old bitch!"
      Jumping to their feet, they surrounded her threateningly.

      Osugi did not flinch. "Come outside!" she commanded grimly as she placed
      her hand on her short sword.
       The workmen had second thoughts. The way she looked and carried on,
she had to be from a samurai family; they might get into trouble if they weren't
careful. Their manner softened noticeably.
       Observing the change, Osugi declared grandly, "Henceforward, I'll not
countenance rudeness from the likes of you." With a look of satisfaction on her
face, she went out and started up the road again, leaving the spectators to gape at
her stubborn, straight back.
       She was hardly on her way again before an apprentice, his muddy feet
grotesquely covered with shavings and sawdust, ran up behind her, carrying a
bucket of mucky clay.
       Shouting, "How do you like this, you old witch?" he slung the contents of
his pail at her back.
       "O-w-w-w!" The howl did credit to Osugi's lungs, but before she could
turn around, the apprentice had vanished. When she realized the extent of the
damage, she scowled bitterly and tears of sheer vexation filled her eyes.
       The merriment was general.
       "What're you nincompoops laughing at?" raged Osugi, baring her teeth.
"What's so funny about an old woman being splattered with grime? Is this the
way you welcome elderly people to Edo? You're not even human! Just
remember, you'll all be old one day."
       This outburst attracted even more onlookers.
       "Edo, indeed!" she snorted. "To hear people talk, you'd think it was the
greatest city in the whole country. And what is it? A place full of dirt and filth,
where everybody's pulling down hills and filling in swamps and digging ditches
and piling up sand from the seaside. Not only that, it's full of riffraff, like you'd
never find in Kyoto or anywhere in the west." Having got that off her chest, she
turned her back on the sniggering crowd and went rapidly on her way.
       To be sure, the city's newness was its most remarkable feature. The wood
and plaster of the houses was all bright and fresh, many building sites were only
partially filled in, and ox and horse dung assailed the eyes and nostrils.
       Not so long ago, this road had been a mere footpath through the rice
paddies between the villages of Hibiya and Chiyoda. Had Osugi gone a little to
the west, nearer Edo Castle, she would have found an older and more sedate
district, where daimyō and vassals of the shōgun had begun building residences
soon after Tokugawa Ieyasu occupied Edo in 1590.

       As it was, absolutely nothing appealed to her. She felt ancient. Everyone
she saw—shopkeepers, officials on horseback, samurai striding by in basket hats
—all were young, as were laborers, craftsmen, vendors, soldiers, even generals.
       The front of one house, where plasterers were still at work, bore a shop
sign, behind which sat a heavily powdered woman, brushing her eyebrows as she
awaited customers. In other half-finished buildings, people were selling sake,
setting up displays of dry goods, laying in supplies of dried fish. One man was
hanging out a sign advertising medicine.
       "If I weren't looking for someone," Osugi mumbled sourly, "I wouldn't
stay in this garbage dump a single night."
       Coming to a hill of excavated dirt blocking the road, she halted. At the foot
of a bridge crossing the as yet waterless moat stood a shanty. Its walls consisted
of reed matting held in place by strips of bamboo, but a banner proclaimed that
this was a public bath. Osugi handed over a copper coin and went in to wash her
kimono. After cleaning it as well as she could, she borrowed a drying pole and
hung the garment up by the side of the shanty. Clothed in her underwear, with a
light bathrobe draped over her back, she squatted in the shadow of the bathhouse
and gazed absently at the road.
      Across the street, half a dozen men stood in a circle, haggling in voices loud
      enough for Osugi to hear what they were saying.
      "How many square feet is it? I wouldn't mind considering it if the price is
      right."
      "There's two thirds of an acre. The price is what I mentioned before. I can't
      come down from that."
      "It's too much. You must know that yourself."
      "Not at all. It costs a lot of money to fill in land. And don't forget, there's no
      more available around here."
      "Oh, there must be. They're filling in everywhere."
       "Already sold. People are snatching it up as it is, swamp and all. You won't
find three hundred square feet for sale. Of course, if you're willing to go way
over toward the Sumida River, you might be able to get something cheaper."
       "Do you guarantee there's two thirds of an acre?"
       "You don't have to take my word for it. Get a rope and measure it off
yourself."
       Osugi was astounded; the figure quoted for a hundred square feet would
have been sufficient for tens of acres of good rice land. But essentially the same
conversation was taking place all over the city, for many a merchant speculated

in land. Osugi was also mystified. "Why would anybody want land here? It's no
good for rice, and you can't call this place a city."
        By and by the deal across the street was sealed with a ritual hand clapping
intended to bring good luck to all concerned.
        As she idly watched the departing shadows, Osugi became conscious of a
hand on the back of her obi. "Thief!" she shrieked as she made a grab for the
pickpocket's wrist. But her coin purse had already been removed, and the thief
was already in the street.
        "Thief!" Osugi screamed again. Flying after the man, she managed to
throw her arms around his waist. "Help! Thief!"
        The pickpocket struggled, striking her several times in the face without
being able to break her grip. "Let go of me, you cow!" he shouted, kicking her in
the ribs. With a loud grunt, Osugi fell down, but she had her short sword out and
slashed at the man's ankle.
        "Ow!" Blood pouring from the wound, he limped a few steps, then flopped
down on the ground.
        Startled by the commotion, the land dealers turned around, and one of
them exclaimed, "Hey, isn't that that good-for-nothing from Kōshū?" The
speaker was Hangawara Yajibei, master of a large gang of construction workers.
        "Looks like him," agreed one of his henchmen. "What's that in his hand?
Looks like a purse."
        "It does, doesn't it? And somebody just yelled thief. Look! There's an old
woman sprawled out on the ground. Go see what's the matter with her. I'll take
care of him."
        The pickpocket was on his feet and running again, but Yajibei caught up
with him and slapped him to the ground as he might have swatted a grasshopper.
        Returning to his boss, the henchman reported, "Just as we thought. He
stole the old lady's purse."
        "I have it here. How is she?"
        "Not hurt bad. She fainted, but came to screaming bloody murder." "She's
still sitting there. Can't she stand up?"
        "I guess not. He kicked her in the ribs."
        "You son of a bitch!" Still glaring at the pickpocket, Yajibei issued a
command to his underling. "Ushi, put up a stake."
        The words set the thief to trembling as though the point of a knife were
being pressed against his throat. "Not that," he pleaded, groveling in the dirt at
Yajibei's feet. "Let me off just this once. I promise I won't do it again."

       Yajibei shook his head. "No. You'll get what you deserve."
       Ushi, who had been named after the zodiac sign under which he was born,
a not uncommon practice among farmers, returned with two workmen from the
nearby bridge site.
      "Over there," he said, pointing toward the middle of a vacant lot.
      After the workmen had driven a heavy post into the ground, one of them
      asked, "This good enough?"
      "That's fine," said Yajibei. "Now tie him to it, and nail a board above his
      head."
       When this had been done, Yajibei borrowed a carpenter's ink pot and brush
and wrote on the board: "This man is a thief. Until recently, he worked for me,
but he has committed a crime for which he must be punished. He is to be tied
here, exposed to rain and sun, for seven days and seven nights. By order of
Yajibei of Bakurōchō."
       "Thanks," he said, returning the ink pot. "Now, if it's not too much trouble,
give him a bite to eat every once in a while. Just enough to keep him from
starving. Anything left over from your lunch will do."
       The two workmen, along with others who had congregated in the
meantime, signified their assent. Some of the laborers promised that they would
see to it that the thief got his share of ridicule. It wasn't just samurai who feared
public exposure of their misdeeds or weaknesses. Even for ordinary townspeople
in these times, to be laughed at was the worst of all punishments.
       Punishing criminals without reference to law was a firmly established
practice. In the days when the warriors were too busy with warfare to maintain
order, townsmen had, for the sake of their own safety, taken it upon themselves
to deal with miscreants. Though Edo now had an official magistrate and a
system was developing whereby leading citizens in each district functioned as
government representatives, the summary administration of justice still occurred.
With conditions still being a bit chaotic, the authorities saw little reason to
interfere.
       "Ushi," said Yajibei, "take the old lady her purse. Too bad this had to
happen to somebody her age. She seems to be all alone. What happened to her
kimono?"
       "She says she washed it and hung it up to dry."
       "Go get it for her, then bring her along. We might as well take her home
with us. There's little point in punishing the thief if we're going to leave her here
for some other ruffian to prey on."

       Moments later, Yajibei strode away. Ushi was close behind, the kimono
over his arm and Osugi on his back.
       They soon reached Nihombashi, the "Bridge of Japan" from which all
distances along the roads leading out of Edo were now measured. Stone parapets
supported the wooden arch, and since the bridge had been constructed only
about a year before, the railings still preserved a feeling of newness. Boats from
Kamakura and Odawara were moored along one riverbank. On the other was the
city's fish market.
       "Oh, my side hurts," Osugi said with a loud groan.
       The fishmongers looked up to see what was going on.
       Being gaped at was not to Yajibei's liking. Glancing back at Osugi, he said,
"We'll be there soon. Try to hold on. Your life's not in danger."
       Osugi laid her head on Ushi's back and became as quiet as a baby.
       In the downtown area, tradesmen and artisans had formed their own
neighborhoods. There was a blacksmiths' district, one for lance-makers, others
for dyers, tatami weavers, and so on. Yajibei's house stood out prominently from
those of the other carpenters because the front half of the roof was covered with
tiles; all the other houses had board roofs. Until a fire a couple of years before,
nearly all the roofs had been made of thatch. As it happened, Yajibei had
acquired what passed for his surname from his roof, Hangawara meaning "half
tiled."
       He had come to Edo as a rōnin, but being both clever and warmhearted, he
had proved to be a skillful manager of men. Before long he set himself up as a
contractor employing a sizable crew of carpenters, roofers and unskilled
workers. From building projects carried out for various daimyō, he acquired
enough capital to branch out into the real estate business as well. Too affluent
now to have to work with his own hands, he played the role of local boss.
Among Edo's numerous self-appointed bosses, Yajibei was one of the best
known and most highly respected.
       The townspeople looked up to the bosses as well as to the warriors, but of
the two, the bosses were the more highly admired, because they usually stood up
for the common people. Although those of Edo had a style and spirit of their
own, the bosses were not unique to the new capital. Their history went back to
the troubled latter days of the Ashikaga shogunate, when gangs of thugs roamed
the countryside like prides of lions, pillaging at will and submitting to no
restraints.
       According to a writer of that era, they wore little more than vermilion

loincloths and wide stomach wrappers. Their long swords were very long—
nearly four feet—and even their short swords were more than two feet in length.
Many used other weapons, of a cruder type, such as battle-axes and "iron rakes."
They let their hair grow wild, using thick strips of rope for headbands, and
leather leggings often covered their calves.
       Having no fixed loyalties, they operated as mercenaries, and after peace
was restored, were ostracized by both farmers and samurai alike. By the Edo era,
those not content with being bandits or highwaymen often sought their fortunes
in the new capital. More than a few succeeded, and this breed of leaders was
once described as having "righteousness for bones, love of the people for flesh
and gallantry for skin." In short, they were popular heroes par excellence.
