A One-Night Love Affair


       Musashi's injury was painful, so instead of spending time in Kamisuwa to
make inquiries about Otsū and Jōtarō, he went on to the hot springs at
Shimosuwa. This town, on the banks of Lake Suwa, was quite a large one, with
the houses of ordinary townsmen alone numbering over a thousand.
       At the inn designated for use by daimyō, the bath was covered by a roof,
but otherwise the pools situated along the roadside were open to the sky and
available to anyone who wanted to use them.
       Musashi hung his clothes and swords on a tree and eased himself into the
steaming water. As he massaged the swelling on the right side of his abdomen,
he rested his head against a rock on the edge of the pool, closed his eyes and
savored a groggy, pleasurable sense of well-being. The sun was beginning to set,
and a reddish mist rose from the surface of the lake, which he could see between
the fishermen's houses along the shore.
       A couple of small vegetable plots lay between the pool and the road, where
people and horses were coming and going with the usual noise and bustle. At a
shop selling lamp oil and sundries, a samurai was purchasing straw sandals.
Having selected a suitable pair, he sat down on a stool, took off his old ones and
tied the new ones on.
       "You must have heard about it," he said to the shopkeeper. "It happened
under the great spreading pine at Ichijōji near Kyoto. This rōnin took on the
entire House of Yoshioka all by himself and fought with a spirit you rarely hear
about anymore. I'm sure he passed this way. Are you certain you didn't see him?"
       For all his eagerness, the samurai seemed to know little about the man he
was looking for, neither his age nor how he might be dressed. Disappointed
when he received a negative reply, he repeated, "I must find him somehow," two
or three times while he finished tying his sandals.
       The samurai, a man of about forty, was well dressed and sunburned from
traveling. The hair at his temples stood out around the cords of his basket hat,
and the toughness in his facial expression matched his manly build. Musashi
suspected his body bore the marks and calluses that come from wearing armor. "I
don't remember ever seeing him before," he thought. "But if he's going around
talking about the Yoshioka School, maybe he's one of their students. The

school's had so many students; a few must have some backbone. They may be
hatching another plot for revenge."
       When the man had completed his business and left, Musashi dried himself
and put on his clothes, thinking the coast was clear. But when he walked out
onto the highroad, he almost bumped into him.
       The samurai bowed and, looking intently into his face, said, "Aren't you
Miyamoto Musashi?"
       Musashi nodded, and the samurai, ignoring the suspicion written on his
face, said, "I knew it." After a short paean to his own perspicacity, he continued
familiarly, "You can't know how happy I am to meet you at last. I've had the
feeling I'd run into you somewhere along the way." Without pausing to give
Musashi a chance to speak, he urged him to spend the night at the same inn with
him. "Let me assure you," he added, "you don't have to worry about me. My
status, if you'll forgive me for saying so, is such that I usually travel with a dozen
attendants and a change of horses. I'm a retainer of Date Masamune, the lord of
Aoba Castle in Mutsu. My name is Ishimoda Geki."
       When Musashi passively accepted the invitation, Geki decided they would
stay at the inn for daimyō and led him into the place.
       "How about a bath?" he asked. "But of course, you've just had one. Well,
make yourself comfortable while I take one. I'll be back shortly." He took off his
traveling clothes, picked up a towel and left the room.
       Though the man had a winning way about him, Musashi's head was full of
questions. Why would this well-placed warrior be looking for him? Why was he
being so friendly?
       "Wouldn't you like to change into something more comfortable?" asked the
maid, proffering one of the cotton-stuffed kimonos furnished to guests.
       "No, thank you. I'm not sure I'll be staying."
       Musashi stepped out onto the veranda. Behind him he heard the maid
quietly setting the dinner trays. As he watched the ripples on the lake change
from deep indigo to black, the image of Otsū’s sad eyes formed in his mind. "I
suppose I'm not looking in the right place," he thought. "Anyone evil enough to
kidnap a woman certainly has the instinct to avoid towns." He seemed to hear
Otsū calling for help. Was it really all right to take the philosophic view that all
things happen as a result of heaven's will? Standing there doing nothing, he felt
guilty.
       Coming back from his bath, Ishimoda Geki apologized for having left him
alone and sat down before his dinner tray. Noticing that Musashi still wore his

own kimono, he asked, "Why don't you change?"
       "I'm comfortable in what I have on. I wear this all the time—on the road,
inside the house, when I sleep on the ground under the trees."
       Geki was favorably impressed. "I might have known," he said. "You want
to be ready for action at any time, no matter where you are. Lord Date would
admire that." He stared with unconcealed fascination at Musashi's face, which
was lit from the side by the lamp. Remembering himself after a moment, he said,
"Come. Sit down and have some sake." He rinsed off a cup in a bowl of water
and offered it to Musashi.
       Musashi seated himself and bowed. Resting his hands on his knees, he
asked, "Could you tell me, sir, why you're treating me in such a friendly manner?
And if you don't mind, why you were inquiring about me out on the highroad."
       "I suppose it's only natural for you to wonder, but there's really very little
to explain. Perhaps the simplest way to put it is that I have a sort of crush on
you." He paused for a moment, laughed and went on: "Yes, it's a matter of
infatuation, a case of one man being attracted to another."
       Geki seemed to feel this was sufficient explanation, but Musashi was more
mystified than ever. While it did not seem impossible for one man to be
enamored of another, he himself had never experienced such an attachment.
Takuan was too severe to inspire strong affection. Kōetsu lived in an entirely
different world. Sekishūsai occupied a plane so far above Musashi's that either
liking or disliking was inconceivable. Though it could be Geki's way of
flattering him, a man who made such statements opened himself to the charge of
insincerity. Still, Musashi doubted that this samurai was a sycophant; he was too
solid, too manly in appearance, for that.
       "Precisely what do you mean," Musashi asked with a sober air, "when you
say you are attracted to me?"
       "Perhaps I'm being presumptuous, but ever since I heard of your feat at
Ichijōji, I've been convinced that you're a man I would like, and like very much."
       "Were you in Kyoto then?"
       "Yes, I arrived during the first month of the year and was staying at Lord
Date's residence on Sanjō Avenue. When I happened to drop in on Lord
Karasumaru Mitsuhiro the day after the fight, I heard quite a bit about you. He
said he'd met you and remarked on your youth and what you'd been doing in the
past. Feeling this strong attraction, I resolved that I must make an effort to meet
you. On my way from Kyoto, I saw the sign you put up at Shiojiri Pass."
       "Oh, you saw that?" Ironic, thought Musashi, that instead of bringing him

Jōtarō, the sign had brought him someone of whose existence he had never
dreamed.
       But the more he considered the matter, the less he felt he deserved the
esteem in which Geki seemed to hold him. Painfully conscious of his own
mistakes and failures, he found Geki's adulation embarrassing.
       With perfect honesty, he said, "I think you're rating me too highly."
       "There are a number of outstanding samurai serving under Lord Date—his
fief has an income of five million bushels, you know—and in time I've met
many a skilled swordsman. But from what I've heard, it would seem that few can
be compared with you. What's more, you're still very young. You have your
whole future before you. And that, I suppose, is why you appeal to me. Anyway,
now that I've found you, let's be friends. Have a drink, and talk about anything
that interests you."
       Musashi accepted the sake cup in good humor and began matching his host
drink for drink. Before long, his face was bright red.
       Geki, still going strong, said, "We samurai from the north can drink a lot.
We do it to stay warm. Lord Date can outdrink any of us. With a strong general
in the lead, it wouldn't do for the troops to fall behind."
       The maid kept bringing more sake. Even after she'd trimmed the lamp
wick several times, Geki showed no inclination to stop. "Let's drink all night," he
suggested. "That way, we can talk all night."
       "Fine," agreed Musashi. Then, with a smile: "You said you'd talked to Lord
Karasumaru. Do you know him well?"
       "You couldn't say we're close friends, but over the years I've been to his
house any number of times on errands. He's very friendly, you know."
       "Yes, I met him on the introduction of Hon'ami Kōetsu. For a nobleman,
he seemed remarkably full of life."
       Looking somewhat dissatisfied, Geki asked, "Is that your only impression?
If you'd talked with him at any length, I'd think you'd have been struck by his
intelligence and sincerity."
       "Well, we were in the licensed quarter at the time."
       "In that case, I suppose he refrained from revealing his true self." "What's
he really like?"
       Geki settled himself in more formal fashion and in a rather grave tone said,
"He's a troubled man. A man of sorrows, if you will. The shogunate's dictatorial
ways disturb him greatly."
      For a moment, Musashi was conscious of a lilting sound coming from the

      lake and the shadows cast by the white light of the lamp.
      Abruptly Geki asked, "Musashi, my friend, for whose sake are you trying to
      perfect your swordsmanship?"
      Never having considered the question, Musashi replied with guileless
      candor, "For my own."
       "That's all right as far as it goes, but for whose sake are you trying to
improve yourself? Surely your aim is not merely personal honor and glory.
That's hardly sufficient for a man of your stature." By accident or design, Geki
had come around to the subject he really wanted to talk about. "Now that the
whole country's under Ieyasu's control," he declared, "we have a semblance of
peace and prosperity. But is it real? Can the people actually live happily under
the present system?
       "Over the centuries, we've had the Hōjōs, the Ashikagas, Oda Nobunaga,
Hideyoshi—a long string of military rulers consistently oppressing not only the
people but the Emperor and the court as well. The imperial government has been
taken advantage of, and the people mercilessly exploited. All the benefits have
gone to the military class. This has been going on since Minamoto no Yoritomo,
hasn't it? And the situation today is unchanged.
       "Nobunaga seems to have had some idea of the injustice involved; at least
he built a new palace for the Emperor. Hideyoshi not only honored the Emperor
Go-Yōzei by requiring all the daimyō to pay obeisance to him, but even tried to
provide a measure of welfare and happiness for the common people. But what of
Ieyasu? To all intents and purposes, he has no interest beyond the fortunes of his
own clan. So again, the happiness of the people and the wellbeing of the imperial
family are being sacrificed to create wealth and power for a military dictatorship.
We seem to be at the threshold of another age of tyranny. No one worries about
this state of affairs more than Lord Date Masamune or, among the nobility, Lord
Karasumaru."
       Geki paused, waiting for a response, but none was forthcoming except for
a barely articulate, "I see."
       Like anyone else, Musashi was aware of the drastic political changes that
had occurred since the Battle of Sekigahara. Yet he had never paid any attention
to activities of the daimyō in the Osaka faction, or the ulterior motives of the
Tokugawas, or the stands taken by powerful outside lords like Date and
Shimazu. All he knew about Date was that his fief officially had an income of
three million bushels per year but in fact probably yielded five million, as Geki
had mentioned.

       "Twice every year," Geki went on, "Lord Date sends produce from our fief
to Lord Konoe in Kyoto for presentation to the Emperor. He's never failed to do
this, even in times of war. That's why I was in Kyoto.
       "Aoba Castle is the only one in the country to have a special room
reserved for the Emperor. It's unlikely, of course, that it'll ever be used, but Lord
Date set it aside for him anyway, built it out of wood taken from the old Imperial
Palace when that was rebuilt. He had the wood brought from Kyoto to Sendai by
boat.
       "And let me tell you about the war in Korea. During the campaigns there,
Katō, Konishi and other generals were competing for personal fame and
triumph. Not Lord Date. Instead of his own family crest, he wore the crest of the
rising sun and told everyone he'd never have led his men to Korea for the glory
of his own clan or for that of Hideyoshi. He went out of love for Japan itself."
       While Musashi listened attentively, Geki became absorbed in his
monologue, describing his master in glowing terms and assuring Musashi that he
was unexcelled in his single-minded devotion to the nation and the Emperor.
       For a time he forgot about drinking but then suddenly looked down and
said, "The sake's cold." Clapping his hands for the maid, he was about to order
more.
       Musashi hurriedly interrupted. "I've had more than enough. If you don't
mind, I'd rather have some rice and tea now."
       "Already?" mumbled Geki. He was obviously disappointed but, out of
deference to his guest, told the girl to bring the rice.
       Geki continued to talk as they ate. The impression Musashi formed of the
spirit that seemed to prevail among the samurai of Lord Date's fief was that, as
individuals and as a group, they were vitally concerned with the Way of the
Samurai and with the problem of disciplining themselves in accordance with the
Way.
       This Way had existed since ancient times, when the warrior class had come
into being, but its moral values and obligations were now little more than a
vague memory. During the chaotic domestic strife of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, the ethics of the military man had been distorted, if not totally ignored,
and now almost anyone who could wield a sword or shoot an arrow from a bow
was regarded as a samurai, regardless of the attention—or lack of it—given to
the deeper meaning of the Way.
       The self-styled samurai of the day were often men of lower character and
baser instincts than common peasants or townsmen. Having nothing but brawn

and technique to command the respect-of those beneath them, they were in the
long run doomed to destruction. There were few daimyō capable of seeing this,
and only a handful of the higher vassals of the Tokugawas and the Toyotomis
gave any thought to establishing a new Way of the Samurai, which could
become the foundation of the nation's strength and prosperity.
       Musashi's thoughts returned to the years when he had been confined in
Himeji Castle. Takuan, remembering that Lord Ikeda had in his library a
handwritten copy of Nichiyō Shūshin-kan by Fushikian, had taken it out for
Musashi to study. Fushikian was the literary name of the celebrated general
Uesugi Kenshin; in his book, he recorded points of daily ethical training for the
guidance of his chief vassals. From this, Musashi had not only learned about
Kenshin's personal activities but also gained an understanding of why Kenshin's
fief in Echigo had come to be known throughout the country for its wealth and
military prowess.
       Swayed by Geki's enthusiastic descriptions, he began to feel that Lord
Date, besides equaling Kenshin in integrity, had created in his domain an
atmosphere in which samurai were encouraged to develop a new Way, one that
would enable them to resist even the shogunate, should that become necessary.
       "You must forgive me for going on and on about matters of personal
interest," said Geki. "What do you think, Musashi? Wouldn't you like to come to
Sendai, see for yourself? His lordship is honest and straightforward. If you're
striving to find the Way, your present status doesn't matter to him. You can talk
with him as you would with any other man.
       "There's a great need for samurai who will devote their lives to their
country. I'll be more than happy to recommend you. If it's all right with you, we
can go to Sendai together."
       By this time the dinner trays had been removed, but Geki's ardor was in no
way diminished. Impressed, but still cautious, Musashi replied, "I'll have to give
it some thought before I can reply."
       After they had said good night, Musashi went to his room, where he lay
awake in the dark, his eyes glistening.
       The Way of the Samurai. He concentrated on this concept as it applied to
himself and to his sword.
       Suddenly he saw the truth: the techniques of a swordsman were not his
goal; he sought an all-embracing Way of the Sword. The sword was to be far
more than a simple weapon; it had to be an answer to life's questions. The Way
of Uesugi Kenshin and Date Masamune was too narrowly military, too

hidebound. It would be up to him to add to its human aspect, to give it greater
profundity, greater loftiness.
     For the first time, he asked whether it was possible for an insignificant
human being to become one with the universe.
