A Cleansing Fire


       Clenching his teeth tightly on the sputtering fuse, the man made ready to
fire his musket again. His confederate crouched down, and squinting into the
distance, whispered, "Do you think it's safe?"
       "I'm sure I got him with the first shot," came the confident reply.
       The two crept cautiously forward, but no sooner had they reached the edge
of the bank than Musashi jumped up. The musketeer gasped and fired but lost
his balance, sending the bullet uselessly skyward. As the echo reverberated
through the ravine, both men, the other two from the teahouse, fled up the path.
       Suddenly one of them stopped in his tracks and roared, "Wait! What are
we running for? There's two of us and only one of him. I'll take him on and you
can back me up."
       "I'm with you!" shouted the musketeer, letting go of the fuse and aiming
the butt of his weapon at Musashi.
       They were definitely a cut above ordinary hoodlums. The man Musashi
took to be the leader wielded his sword with genuine finesse; nonetheless, he
was a poor match for Musashi, who sent them both flying through the air with a
single sword stroke. The musketeer, sliced from shoulder to waist, fell dead to
the ground, his upper torso hanging over the bank as if by a thread. The other
man sped up the slope, clutching a wounded forearm, with Musashi in hot
pursuit. Showers of dirt and gravel rose and fell in his wake.
       The ravine, Buna Valley, lay midway between Wada and Daimon passes
and took its name from the beech trees that seemed to fill it. On its highest point
stood an exceptionally large mountaineer's cabin surrounded by trees and itself
crudely fashioned of beech logs.
       Scrambling rapidly toward the tiny flame of a torch, the bandit shouted,
"Douse the lights!"
       Protecting the flame with an outstretched sleeve, a woman exclaimed,
"Why, you— Oh! You're covered with blood!"
       "Sh-shut up, you fool! Put out the lights—the ones inside too." He could
hardly get the words out from panting, and with a last look behind him, he
hurtled past her. The woman blew out the torch and rushed after him.
       By the time Musashi arrived at the cabin, not a trace of light was visible

anywhere.
       "Open up!" he bellowed. He was indignant, not for being taken to be a
fool, nor because of the cowardly attack, but because men like these daily
inflicted great harm on innocent travelers.
       He might have broken open the wooden rain shutters, but rather than make
a frontal attack, which would have left his back dangerously exposed, he
cautiously kept at a distance of four or five feet.
       "Open up!"
       Getting no answer, he picked up the largest rock he could handle and
hurled it at the shutters. It struck the crack between the two panels, sending both
the man and the woman reeling into the house. A sword flew out from beneath
them and was followed by the man crawling on his knees. He quickly regained
his feet and retreated into the house. Musashi bounded forward and seized him
by the back of his kimono.
       "Don't kill me! I'm sorry!" pleaded Gion Tōji, his whining tone exactly
that of a petty crook.
       He was soon back on his feet again, trying to find Musashi's weak point.
Musashi parried each of his moves, but when he pressed forward to hem in his
opponent, Tōji, mustering all his strength, pulled his short sword and made a
powerful thrust. Dodging adroitly, Musashi swept him up in his arms and with a
cry of contempt sent him crashing into the next room. Either an arm or a leg
struck the pot hanger, for the bamboo pole from which it hung broke with a loud
crack. White ashes billowed up from the hearth like a volcanic cloud.
       A barrage of missiles coming through the smoke and ashes kept Musashi at
bay. As the ashes settled, he saw that his adversary was no longer the bandits'
chief, who was flat on his back near the wall. The woman, between curses, was
throwing everything she could lay her hands on—pot lids, kindling, metal
chopsticks, tea bowls.
       Musashi leapt forward and quickly pinned her to the floor, but she
managed to pull a bodkin from her hair and take a stab at him. When he brought
his foot down on her wrist, she gnashed her teeth, then cried out in anger and
disgust at the unconscious Tōji, "Haven't you any pride? How can you lose to a
nobody like this?"
       Hearing the voice, Musashi abruptly drew in his breath and let her go. She
jumped to her feet, grabbed up the short sword and lunged at him.
      "Stop it, ma'am," said Musashi.
      Startled by the oddly courteous tone, she paused and gaped at him. "Why,

      it's ... it's Takezō!"
      His hunch was right. Apart from Osugi, the only woman who would still
      call him by his childhood name was Okō.
       "It is Takezō," she exclaimed, her voice growing syrupy. "Your name's
Musashi now, isn't it? You've become quite a swordsman, haven't you?"
      "What are you doing in a place like this?"
      "I'm ashamed to say."
      "Is that man lying over there your husband?"
      "You must know him. He's what's left of Gion Tōji."
       "That's Tōji?" murmured Musashi. He had heard in Kyoto what a
reprobate Tōji was, and how he had pocketed the money collected to enlarge the
school and absconded with Okō. Still, as he looked at the human wreck by the
wall, he couldn't help feeling sorry for him. "You'd better tend to him," he said.
"If I'd known he was your husband, I wouldn't have been so rough with him."
       "Oh, I want to crawl in a hole and hide," simpered Okō.
       She went to Tōji's side, gave him some water, bound his wounds, and
when he had begun to come around, told him who Musashi was.
       "What?" he croaked. "Miyamoto Musashi? The one who ... Oh, this is
awful!" Placing his hands over his face, he doubled up abjectly.
       Forgetting his anger, Musashi allowed himself to be treated as an honored
guest. Okō swept the floor, tidied up the hearth, put on new kindling and heated
some sake.
       Handing him a cup, she said, in accordance with the accepted rules of
etiquette, "We haven't a thing to offer, but . . ."
       "I had quite enough at the teahouse," Musashi replied politely. "Please
don't go to any trouble."
       "Oh, I hope you can eat the food I've prepared. It's been such a long time."
Having hung a pot of stew on the pot hanger, she sat down beside him and
poured his sake.
       "It reminds me of old times at Mount Ibuki," said Musashi amiably.
       A strong wind had come up, and though the shutters were again securely in
place, it came in through various cracks and teased the smoke from the hearth as
it rose to the ceiling.
       "Please don't remind me of that," said Okō. "But tell me, have you heard
anything of Akemi? Do you have any idea where she is?"
       "I heard she spent several days at the inn on Mount Hiei. She and
Matahachi were planning to go to Edo. Seems she ran away with all his money."

       "Oh?" said Okō disappointedly. "Her too." She gazed at the floor, sadly
comparing her daughter's life with her own.
       When Tōji had recovered sufficiently, he joined them and begged
Musashi's forgiveness. He had, he avowed, acted on a sudden impulse, which he
now deplored. There would come a day, he assured his guest, when he would
reenter society as the Gion Tōji the world had known before.
       Musashi kept quiet, but he would have liked to say that there didn't seem
to be much to choose from between Tōji the samurai and Tōji the bandit, but if
he did return to the life of a warrior, the roads would be that much safer for
travelers.
       Somewhat mellowed by the sake, he said to Okō, "I think you'd be wise to
give up this dangerous way of life."
       "You're quite right, but of course, it's not as though I'm living this way out
of choice. When we left Kyoto, we were going to try our luck in Edo. But in
Suwa, Tōji got to gambling and lost everything we had—travel money,
everything. I thought of the moxa business, so we started gathering herbs and
selling them in the town. Oh, I've had enough of his get-rich-quick schemes to
last a lifetime. After tonight, I'm through." As always, a few drinks had
introduced a coquettish note into her speech. She was beginning to turn on the
charm.
       Okō was one of those women of indeterminate age, and she was still
dangerous. A house cat will romp coyly on its master's knees so long as it is well
fed and cared for, but turn it loose in the mountains, and in no time it will be
prowling the night with flaming eyes, ready to feast off a corpse or tear the
living flesh off travelers who have fallen sick by the wayside. Okō was very
much like that.
       "Tōji," she said lovingly, "according to Takezō, Akemi was headed for
Edo. Couldn't we go there too and live more like human beings again? If we
found Akemi, I'm sure we'd think of some profitable business to go into."
       "Well, maybe,' was the unenthusiastic reply. His arms were wrapped
pensively around his knees; perhaps the implied idea—peddling Akemi's body—
was a little raw even for him. Tōji, after living with this predatory woman, was
beginning to have the same regrets as Matahachi.
       To Musashi, the expression on Tōji's face seemed pathetic. It reminded
him of Matahachi. With a shudder, he recalled how he himself had once been
enticed by her charms.
       "Okō," said Tōji, lifting his head. "It won't be long till daylight. Musashi's

probably tired. Why don't you fix a place for him in the back room, so he can get
some rest?"
       "Yes, of course." With a tipsy sidelong glance at Musashi, she said, "You'll
have to be careful, Takezō. It's dark back there."
       "Thanks. I could use some sleep."
       He followed her down a dark corridor to the back of the house. The room
seemed to be an addition to the cabin. It was supported by logs and projected out
over the valley, with a drop of about seventy feet from the outer wall to the river.
The air was damp from the mist and the spray blowing in from a waterfall. Each
time the groaning of the wind rose a trifle, the little room rocked like a boat.
      Okō's white feet retreated across the slatted floor of the outdoor hallway to
      the hearth room.
      "Has he gone to sleep?" asked Tōji.
      "I think so," she replied, kneeling by his side. She whispered in his ear,
      "What are you going to do?"
      "Go call the others."
      "You're going through with it?"
      "Absolutely! It's not just a matter of money. If I kill the bastard, I'll have
      taken revenge for the House of Yoshioka."
       Tucking up the skirt of her kimono, she went outside, Under the starless
sky, deep in the mountains, she sped through the black wind like a feline demon,
her long hair streaming out behind.
       The nooks and crevices on the mountainside were not inhabited solely by
birds and beasts. As Okō raced along, she made contact with more than twenty
men, all members of Tōji's band. Trained for night forays, they moved more
quietly than floating leaves to a spot just in front of the cabin.
      "Only one man?"
      "A samurai?"
      "Does he have money?"
       The whispered exchanges were accompanied by explanatory gestures and
eye movements. Carrying muskets and daggers and the type of lances used by
boar hunters, a few of them surrounded the back room. About half went down
into the valley, while a couple stopped halfway down, directly below the room.
       The floor of the room was covered with reed mats. Along one wall were
neat little piles of dried herbs and a collection of mortars and other tools used to
make medicine. Musashi found the pleasant aroma of the herbs soothing; it
seemed to beckon him to close his eyes and sleep. His body felt dull and swollen

to the tips of his extremities. But he knew better than to give in to the sweet
temptation.
       He was aware there was something afoot. The herb gatherers of Mimasaka
never had storage sheds like this; theirs were never located where dampness
accumulated and were always at some distance from dense foliage. By the dim
light of a small lamp resting on a mortar stand beside his pillow, he could see
something else that disturbed him. The metal brackets holding the room together
at the corners were surrounded by numerous nail holes. He could also discern
fresh wooden surfaces that must previously have been covered by joinery. The
implication was unmistakable: the room had been rebuilt, probably a number of
times.
       A tiny smile came to his lips, but he did not stir.
       "Takezō," Okō called softly. "Are you asleep?" Gently sliding the shoji
aside, she tiptoed to his pallet and placed a tray near his head. "I'll put some
water here for you," she said. He gave no sign of being awake.
       When she was back in the cabin itself, Tōji whispered, "Is everything all
right?"
       Closing her eyes for emphasis, she replied, "He's sound asleep."
       With a satisfied look, Tōji hurried outside, went to the back of the cabin
and waved a lighted musket fuse, whereupon the men below pulled the supports
out from under the room, sending it crashing down into the valley—walls,
frame, ridgepole and all.
       With a triumphant roar, the others sprang from their hiding places, like
hunters from behind portable blinds, and rushed down to the riverbank. The next
step was to extricate the corpse and the victim's belongings from the debris.
After that, it would be a simple matter to gather up the pieces and rebuild the
room.
      The bandits jumped into the pile of planks and posts like dogs falling on
      bones.
      Arriving from above, others asked, "Have you found the body?" "No, not
      yet."
      "It's got to be here somewhere."
       Tōji shouted raucously, "Maybe he struck a rock or something on the way
down and bounced off to the side. Look all around."
       Rocks, water, the trees and plants of the valley, were taking on a bright
reddish cast. With startled exclamations, Tōji and his henchmen looked toward
the sky. Seventy feet above, bright flames spouted from the doors, windows,

walls and roof of the cabin. It had turned into a huge ball of fire.
      "Quick! Hur-r-ry! Get back up here!" The piercing summons came from
Okō, and sounded like the howl of a woman gone mad.
      By the time the men had made their way up the cliff, the flames were
dancing wildly in the wind. Unprotected from the shower of sparks and embers,
Okō stood tied securely to a tree trunk.
      To a man, they were dumbfounded. Musashi gone? How? How could he
conceivably have outwitted them all?
      Tōji lost heart; he did not even send his men in pursuit. He had heard
enough about Musashi to know they'd never catch him. On their own, however,
the bandits quickly organized search parties and flew off in all directions.
      They found no trace of Musashi.
