Spring Shower in Red


      "Isn't Yajibei here?" Kojirō asked loudly.
      The gamblers were so absorbed in their play, and the weepers in their
      memories of childhood, that no one replied.
      Going over to Jūrō, who was lying on his back with his arms over his eyes,
      Kojirō said, "May I ask what's going on?"
       "Oh, I didn't know it was you, sir." There was a hasty wiping of eyes and
blowing of noses as Jūrō and the others pulled themselves to their feet and
bowed sheepishly to their sword instructor.
      "Are you crying?" he asked.
      "Unh, yes. I mean, no."
      "You're an odd one."
       While the others drifted off, Jūrō began telling about his chance encounter
with Musashi, happy to have a subject that might distract Kojirō's attention from
the state of the young men's room. "Since the boss is away," he said, "we didn't
know what to do, so Osugi decided to go and talk to you."
      Kojirō's eyes flared brightly. "Musashi's putting up at an inn in
      Bakurōchō?"
      "He was, but now he's staying at Zushino Kōsuke's house."
      "That's an interesting coincidence."
      "Is it?"
       "It just happens I sent my Drying Pole to Zushino to work on. As a matter
of fact, it should be ready now. I came this way today to pick it up."
      "You've been there already?"
      "Not yet. I thought I'd drop in here for a few minutes first."
      "That's lucky. If you'd showed up suddenly, Musashi might have attacked
      you."
      "I'm not afraid of him. But how can I confer with the old lady when she's
      not here?"
      "I don't imagine she's reached Isarago yet. I'll send a good runner to bring
      her back."
       At the council of war held that evening, Kojirō expressed the opinion that
there was no reason to wait for Yajibei's return. He himself would serve as

Osugi's second, so that she might, at long last, take her proper revenge. Jūrō and
Koroku asked to go along too, more for the honor than to help. Though aware of
Musashi's reputation as a fighter, they never imagined he might be a match for
their brilliant instructor.
       Nothing could be done tonight, however. For all her enthusiasm, Osugi
was dead tired and complained of a backache. They decided they would carry
out their plan the following night.
       The next afternoon, Osugi bathed under cold water, blackened her teeth
and dyed her hair. At twilight, she made her preparations for battle, first donning
a white underrobe she had bought to be buried in and had carried around with
her for years. She had had it stamped for good luck at every shrine and temple
she visited—Sumiyoshi Shrine in Osaka, Oyama Hachiman Shrine and
Kiyomizudera in Kyoto, the Kannon Temple in Asakusa, and dozens of less
prominent religious establishments in various parts of the country. The sacred
imprints made the robe resemble a tie-dyed kimono; Osugi felt safer than she
would have in a suit of mail.
       She carefully tucked a letter to Matahachi into the sash under her obi,
together with a copy of the Sutra on the Great Love of Parents. There was also a
second letter, which she always carried in a small money pouch; this said:
"Though I am old, it has become my lot to wander about the country in an effort
to realize one great hope. There is no way of knowing but that I may be slain by
my sworn enemy or die of illness by the wayside. Should this be my fate, I ask
the officials and people of goodwill to use the money in this purse to send my
body home. Sugi, widow of Hon'iden, Yoshino Village, Mimasaka Province."
       With her sword in place, her shins wrapped in white leggings, fingerless
gloves on her hands and a blind-stitched obi snugly holding her sleeveless
kimono in place, her preparations were nearly complete. Placing a bowl of water
on her writing table, she knelt before it and said, "I'm going now." She then
closed her eyes and sat motionless, addressing her thoughts to Uncle Gon.
       Jūrō opened the shoji a crack and peeked in. "Are you ready?" he asked.
"It's about time we were leaving. Kojirō's waiting."
       "I'm ready."
       Joining the others, she went to the place of honor they had left open for her
before the alcove. The Acolyte took a cup from the table, put it in Osugi's hand
and carefully poured her a cupful of sake. Then he did the same for Kojirō and
Jūrō. When each of the four had drunk, they extinguished the lamp and set forth.
       Quite a few of the Hangawara men clamored to be taken along, but Kojirō

refused, since a large group would not only attract attention but encumber them
in a fight.
       As they were going out the gate, one young man called to them to wait. He
then struck sparks from a flint to wish them luck. Outside, under a sky murky
with rain clouds, nightingales were singing.
       As they made their way through the dark, silent streets, dogs started
barking, set off, perhaps, by some instinctive sense that these four human beings
were on a sinister mission.
      "What's that?" Koroku asked, staring back along a narrow lane. "Did you
      see something?"
      "Somebody's following us."
      "Probably one of the fellows from the house," said Kojirō. "They were all
      so eager to come with us."
      "They'd rather brawl than eat."
       They turned a corner, and Kojirō stopped under the eaves of a house,
saying, "Kōsuke's shop's around here, isn't it?" Their voices dropped to whispers.
"Down the street, there, on the other side."
      "What do we do now?" asked Koroku.
      "Proceed according to plan. The three of you hide in the shadows. I'll go to
      the shop."
      "What if Musashi tries to sneak out the back door?"
       "Don't worry. He's no more likely to run away from me than I am from
him. If he ran away, he'd be finished as a swordsman."
       "Maybe we should position ourselves on opposite sides of the house
anyway—just in case."
       "All right. Now, as we agreed, I'll bring Musashi outside and walk along
with him. When we get near Osugi, I'll draw my sword and take him by surprise.
That's the time for her to come out and strike."
       Osugi was beside herself with gratitude. "Thank you, Kojirō. You're so
good to me. You must be an incarnation of the great Hachiman." She clasped her
hands and bowed, as if before the god of war himself.
       In his heart, Kojirō was thoroughly convinced that he was doing the right
thing. Indeed, it is doubtful that ordinary mortals could imagine the vastness of
his self-righteousness at the moment he stepped up to Kōsuke's door.
       At the beginning, when Musashi and Kojirō had been very young, full of
spirit and eager to demonstrate their superiority, there had existed no deep-seated
cause for enmity between them. There had been rivalry, to be sure, but only the

friction that normally arose between two strong and almost equally matched
fighters. What had subsequently rankled with Kojirō was seeing Musashi
gradually gaining fame as a swordsman. Musashi, for his part, respected Kojirō's
extraordinary skill, if not his character, and always treated him with a certain
amount of caution. As the years passed, however, they found themselves at odds
over various matters—the House of Yoshioka, the fate of Akemi, the affair of the
Hon'iden dowager. Conciliation was by now out of the question.
       And now that Kojirō had taken it upon himself to become Osugi's
protector, the trend of events bore the unmistakable seal of fate.
       "Kōsuke!" Kojirō rapped lightly on the door. "Are you awake?" Light
seeped through a crack, but there was no other sign of life inside.
      After a few moments, a voice asked, "Who's there?"
      "Iwama Kakubei gave you my sword to work on. I've come for it." "The
      great long one—is that the one?"
      "Open up and let me in."
      "Just a moment."
      The door slid open, and the two men eyed each other. Blocking the way,
      Kōsuke said curtly, "The sword's not ready yet."
       "I see." Kojirō brushed past Kōsuke and seated himself on the step leading
up to the shop. "When will it be ready?"
       "Well, let's see...." Kōsuke rubbed his chin, pulling the corners of his eyes
down and making his long face seem even longer.
      Kojirō had the feeling he was being made fun of. "Don't you think it's
      taking an awful long time?"
      "I told Kakubei very clearly I couldn't promise when I'd finish." "I can't do
      without it much longer."
      "In that case, take it back."
       "What's this?" Kojirō was taken aback. Artisans didn't talk that way to
samurai. But instead of trying to ascertain what might be behind the man's
attitude, he jumped to the conclusion that his visit had been anticipated.
Thinking it best to act quickly, he said, "By the way, I heard Miyamoto Musashi,
from Mimasaka, is staying here with you."
      "Where did you hear that?" Kōsuke said, looking anxious. "As it happens,
      he is staying with us."
      "Would you mind calling him? I haven't seen him for a long time, since we
      were both in Kyoto."
      "What's your name?"

      "Sasaki Kojirō. He'll know who I am."
      "I'll tell him you're here, but I don't know whether he can see you or not."
      "just a moment."
      "Yes?"
       "Perhaps I'd better explain. I happened to hear at Lord Hosokawa's house
that a man of Musashi's description was living here. I came with the idea of
inviting Musashi out to drink a little and talk a little."
       "I see." Kōsuke turned and went toward the back of the house.
       Kojirō mulled over what to do if Musashi smelled a rat and refused to see
him. Two or three stratagems came to mind, but before he had come to a
decision, he was startled by a horrendous howling scream.
       He jumped like a man who had been savagely kicked. He had
miscalculated. His strategy had been seen through—not only seen through but
turned against him. Musashi must have sneaked out the back door, gone around
to the front and attacked. But who had screamed? Osugi? Jūrō? Koroku?
       "If that's the way it is . . ." thought Kojirō grimly, as he ran out into the
street. Muscles taut, blood racing, in an instant he was ready for anything. "I
have to fight him sooner or later anyway," he thought. He had known this since
that day at the pass on Mount Hiei. The time had come! If Osugi had already
been struck down, Kojirō swore that Musashi's blood would become an offering
for the eternal peace of her soul.
       He had covered about ten paces when he heard his name called from the
side of the road. The painfully forced voice seemed to clutch at his running
footsteps.
      "Koroku, is that you?"
      "I-I-I've b-been h-h-hit."
      "Jūrō! Where's Jūrō?"
      "H-him too."
       "Where is he?" Before the answer came, Kojirō spotted Jūrō's blood-
soaked form about thirty feet away. His entire body bristling with vigilance for
his own safety, he thundered, "Koroku! Which way did Musashi go?"
      "No ... not ... Musashi." Koroku, unable to lift his head, rolled it from side
      to side.
      "What are you saying? Are you telling me it wasn't Musashi who attacked
      you?"
      "Not ... not ... Musa—"
      "Who was it?"

     It was a question Koroku would never answer.
       His thoughts in a turmoil, Kojirō ran to Jūrō and pulled him up by the red,
sticky collar of his kimono. "Jūrō, tell me. Who did it? Which way did he go?"
     But Jūrō, instead of answering, used his last tearful breath to say, "Mother
     ... sorry ... shouldn't have ..."
     "What are you talking about?" snorted Kojirō, letting go of the bloody
     garment.
     "Kojirō! Kojirō, is that you?"
       Running in the direction of Osugi's voice, he saw the old woman lying
helpless in a ditch, straw and vegetable peelings clinging to her face and hair.
"Get me out of here," she pleaded.
     "What are you doing in that filthy water?"
     Kojirō, sounding more angry than sympathetic, yanked her
     unceremoniously out onto the road, where she collapsed like a rag.
     "Where did the man go?" she asked, taking the words out of his mouth.
     "What man? Who attacked you?"
     "I don't know exactly what happened, but I'm sure it was the man who was
     following us."
     "Did he attack suddenly?"
       "Yes! Out of nowhere, like a gust of wind. There was no time to speak. He
jumped out of the shadows and got Jūrō first. By the time Koroku drew his
sword, he was wounded too."
       "Which way did he go?"
       "He shoved me aside, so I didn't even see him, but the footsteps went that
way." She pointed toward the river.
       Running across a vacant lot where the horse market was held, Kojirō came
to the dike at Yanagihara and stopped to look around. Some distance away, he
could see piles of lumber, lights and people.
       When he got closer, he saw they were palanquin bearers. "My two
companions have been struck down in a side street near here," he said. "I want
you to pick them up and take them to the house of Hangawara Yajibei in the
carpenters' district. You'll find an old woman with them. Take her too."
     "Were they attacked by robbers?"
     "Are there robbers around here?"
     "Packs of them. Even we have to be careful."
     "Whoever it was must have come running out from that corner over there.
     Didn't you see anyone?"

      "Just now, you mean?"
      "Yes."
      "I'm leaving," said the bearer. He and the others picked up three palanquins
      and prepared to depart.
      "What about the fare?" asked one.
      "Collect it when you get there."
       Kojirō made a quick search of the riverbank and around the stacks of
lumber, deciding as he did so that he'd do just as well to go back to Yajibei's
house. There was little point in meeting Musashi without Osugi; it also seemed
unwise to face the man in his present state of mind.
       Starting back, he came to a firebreak, along one side of which grew a row
of paulownia trees. He looked at it for a minute, then as he turned away, he saw
the glint of a blade among the trees. Before he knew it, half a dozen leaves fell.
The sword had been aimed at his head.
       "Yellow-livered coward!" he shouted.
       "Not me!" came the reply as the sword struck out a second time from the
darkness.
       Kojirō whirled and jumped back a full seven feet. "If you're Musashi, why
don't you use the proper—" Before he could finish, the sword was at him again.
"Who are you?" he shouted. "Aren't you making a mistake?"
       He dodged a third stroke successfully, and the attacker, badly winded,
realized before attempting a fourth that he was wasting his effort. Changing
tactics, he began inching forward with his blade extended before him. His eyes
were shooting fire. "Silence," he growled. "There's no mistake at all. Perhaps it'll
refresh your memory if you know my name. I'm Hōjō Shinzō."
      "You're one of Obata's students, aren't you?"
      "You insulted my master and killed several of my comrades."
      "By the warrior's code, you're free to challenge me openly at any time.
      Sasaki Kojirō doesn't play hide-and-seek."
      "I'll kill you."
      "Go ahead and try."
       As Kojirō watched him close the distance—twelve feet, eleven, ten—he
quietly loosened the upper part of his kimono and placed his right hand on his
sword. "Come on!" he cried.
       The challenge caused an involuntary hesitation on Shinzō's part, a
momentary wavering. Kojirō's body bent forward, his arm snapped like a bow,
and there was a metallic ring. The next instant, his sword clicked sharply back

into its scabbard. There had been only a thin flashing thread of light.
       Shinzō was still standing, his legs spread apart. There was no sign of blood
yet, but it was plain that he'd been wounded. Though his sword was still
stretched out at eye level, his left hand had gone reflexively to his neck.
       "Oh!" Gasps went up on both sides of Shinzō at the same time—from
Kojirō and from a man running up behind Shinzō. The sound of footsteps,
together with the voice, sent Kojirō off into the darkness.
       "What happened?" cried Kōsuke. He reached out to support Shinzō, only
to have the full weight of the other man's body fall into his arms. "Oh, this looks
bad!" cried Kōsuke. "Help! Help, somebody!"
       A piece of flesh no larger than a clamshell fell from Shinzō's neck. The
blood gushing out soaked first Shinzō's arm, then the skirts of his kimono all the
way to his feet.
