Like Teacher, Like Pupil


       On the short journey back to the shack, Sannosuke rattled on and on about
his dreams for the future.
       But that night, when Musashi told him he should be ready to bid farewell
to the only home he had ever known, he became wistful. They sat up late, and
Sannosuke, misty-eyed and speaking in a soft voice, shared his memories of
parents and grandparents.
       In the morning, while they were preparing to move out, Musashi
announced that henceforth he would call Sannosuke Iori. "If you're going to
become a samurai," he explained, "it's only proper that you take your
grandfather's name." The boy was not yet old enough for his coming-of-age
ceremony, when he would normally have been given his adult name; Musashi
thought taking his grandfather's name would give him something to live up to.
       Later, when the boy seemed to be lingering inside the house, Musashi said
quietly but firmly, "Iori, hurry up. There's nothing in there you need. You don't
want reminders of the past."
       Iori came flying out in a kimono barely covering his thighs, a groom's
straw sandals on his feet and a cloth wrapper containing a box lunch of millet
and rice in his hand. He looked like a little frog, but he was ready and eager for a
new life.
     "Pick a tree away from the house and tie the horse up," Musashi
     commanded.
     "You may as well mount it now."
     "Do as I say."
     "Yes, sir."
       Musashi noted the politeness; it was a small but encouraging sign of the
boy's readiness to adopt the ways of the samurai in place of the slovenly speech
of peasants.
       Iori tied up the horse and came back to where Musashi was standing under
the eaves of the old shack, gazing at the surrounding plain. "What's he waiting
for?" wondered the boy.
       Putting his hand on Iori's head, Musashi said, "This is where you were
born and where you acquired your determination to win."

       Iori nodded.
       "Rather than serve a second lord, your grandfather withdrew from the
warrior class. Your father, true to your grandfather's dying wish, contented
himself with being a mere farmer. His death left you alone in the world, so the
time has come for you to stand on your own feet."
      "Yes, sir."
      "You must become a great man!"
      "I'll try." Tears sprang to his eyes.
       "For three generations this house sheltered your family from wind and
rain. Say your thanks to it, then say good-bye, once and for all, and have no
regrets."
       Musashi went inside and set fire to the hovel.
       When he came out, Iori was blinking back his tears.
       "If we left the house standing," said Musashi, "it'd only become a hideout
for highwaymen or common thieves. I'm burning it to keep men like that from
desecrating the memory of your father and grandfather."
       "I'm grateful."
       The shack turned into a small mountain of fire, then collapsed. "Let's go,"
said Iori, no longer concerned with relics of the past. "Not yet."
      "There's nothing else to do here, is there?"
      Musashi laughed. "We're going to build a new house on that knoll over
      there."
      "New house? What for? You just burned the old one down."
      "That belonged to your father and grandfather. The one we build will be for
      us."
      "You mean we're going to stay here?"
      "That's right."
      "We're not going away somewhere and train and discipline ourselves?"
      "We'll do that here."
      "What can we train ourselves for here?"
       "To be swordsmen, to be samurai. We'll discipline our spirits and work
hard to make ourselves into real human beings. Come with me, and bring that ax
with you." He pointed to a clump of grass where he had put the farm tools.
       Shouldering the ax, Iori followed Musashi to the knoll, where there were a
few chestnut trees, pines and cryptomerias.
       Musashi, stripping to the waist, took the ax and went to work. Soon he was
sending up a veritable shower of white chips of raw wood.

       Iori watched, thinking: "Maybe he's going to build a dōjō. Or are we going
to practice out in the open?"
       One tree fell, then another and another. Sweat poured down Musashi's
ruddy cheeks, washing away the lethargy and loneliness of the past few days.
       He had conceived of his present plan while standing by the farmer's fresh
grave in the tiny burial ground. "I'll lay down my sword for a time," he had
decided, "and work with a hoe instead." Zen, calligraphy, the art of tea, painting
pictures and carving statues were all useful in perfecting one's swordsmanship.
Couldn't tilling a field also contribute to his training? Wasn't this broad tract of
earth, waiting for someone to bring it under cultivation, a perfect training hall?
By changing inhospitable flatlands into farmlands, he would also be promoting
the welfare of future generations.
       He'd lived his whole life like a mendicant Zen priest—on the receiving
end, so to speak, depending on other people for food, shelter and donations. He
wanted to make a change, a radical one, since he'd long suspected that only those
who had actually grown their own grain and vegetables really understood how
sacred and valuable they were. Those who hadn't were like priests who did not
practice what they preached or swordsmen who learned combat techniques but
knew nothing of the Way.
       As a boy, he had been taken by his mother into the fields and had worked
alongside the tenants and villagers. His purpose now, however, was more than
just to produce food for his daily meals; he sought nourishment for his soul. He
wanted to learn what it meant to work for a living, rather than beg for one. He
also wanted to implant his own way of thinking among the people of the district.
As he saw it, by surrendering the land to weeds and thistles and giving in to
storms and floods, they were passing on their hand-to-mouth existence from
generation to generation without ever opening their eyes to their own
potentialities and those of the land around them.
       "Iori," he called, "get some rope and tie up this timber. Then drag it down
to the riverbank."
       When that was done, Musashi propped his ax against a tree and wiped the
sweat off his forehead with his elbow. He then went down and stripped the bark
off the trees with a hatchet. When darkness fell, they built a bonfire with the
scraps and found blocks of wood to use as pillows.
       "Interesting work, isn't it?" said Musashi.
       With perfect honesty, Iori answered, "I don't think it's interesting at all. I
didn't have to become your pupil to learn how to do this."

      "You'll like it better as time goes on."


       As autumn waned, the insect voices faded into silence. Leaves withered
and fell. Musashi and Iori finished their cabin and addressed themselves to the
task of making the land ready for planting.
       One day while he was surveying the land, Musashi suddenly found himself
thinking it was like a diagram of the social unrest that lasted for a century after
the Ōnin War. Such thoughts aside, it was not an encouraging picture.
       Unknown to Musashi, Hōtengahara had over the centuries been buried
many times by volcanic ash from Mount Fuji, and the Tone River had repeatedly
flooded the flatlands. When the weather was fair, the land became bone dry, but
whenever there were heavy rains, the water carved out new channels, carrying
great quantities of dirt and rock along with it. There was no principal stream into
which the smaller ones flowed naturally, the nearest thing to this being a wide
basin that lacked sufficient capacity to either water or drain the area as a whole.
The most urgent need was obvious: to bring the water under control.
       Still, the more he had looked, the more he had questioned why the area
was undeveloped. "It won't be easy," he thought, excited by the challenge it
posed. Joining water and earth to create productive fields was not much different
from leading men and women in such a way that civilization might bloom. To
Musashi it seemed that his goal was in complete agreement with his ideals of
swordsmanship.
       He had come to see the Way of the Sword in a new light. A year or two
earlier, he had wanted only to conquer all rivals, but now the idea that the sword
existed for the purpose of giving him power over other people was unsatisfying.
To cut people down, to triumph over them, to display the limits of one's strength,
seemed increasingly vain. He wanted to conquer himself, to make life itself
submit to him, to cause people to live rather than die. The Way of the Sword
should not be used merely for his own perfection. It should be a source of
strength for governing people and leading them to peace and happiness.
       He realized his grand ideals were no more than dreams, and would remain
so as long as he lacked the political authority to implement them. But here in this
wasteland, he needed neither rank nor power. He plunged into the struggle with
joy and enthusiasm.
       Day in and day out, stumps were uprooted, gravel sifted; land leveled, soil
and rocks made into dikes. Musashi and Iori worked from before dawn until

after the stars were shining bright in the sky.
      Their relentless toil attracted attention. Villagers passing by often stopped,
      stared, and commented.
      "What do they think they're doing?"
      "How can they live in a place like that?"
      "Isn't the boy old San'emon's son?"
       Everyone laughed, but not all let it go at that. One man came out of
genuine kindness and said, "I hate to tell you this, but you're wasting your time.
You can break your backs making a field here, but one storm and it'll be gone
overnight."
       When he saw they were still at it several days later, he seemed a bit
offended. "All you're doing here, I tell you, is making a lot of water holes where
they won't do any good."
       A few days later he concluded that the strange samurai was short on brains.
"Fools!" he shouted in disgust.
       The next day brought a whole group to heckle.
       "If anything could grow here, we wouldn't sweat under the blazing sun
working our own fields, poor as they are. We'd sit home and play the flute."
"And there wouldn't be any famines."
      "You're digging up the place for nothing."
      "Got the sense of a pile of manure."
      Still hoeing, Musashi kept his eyes on the ground and grinned.
      Iori was less complacent, though Musashi had earlier scolded him for
      taking
      the peasants seriously. "Sir"—he pouted—"they all say the same thing."
      "Pay no attention."
      "I can't help it," he cried, seizing a rock to throw at their tormentors.
       An angry glare from Musashi stopped him. "Now, what good do you think
that would do? If you don't behave yourself, I'm not going to have you as my
pupil."
       Iori's ears burned at the rebuke, but instead of dropping the rock, he cursed
and hurled it at a boulder. The rock gave off sparks as it cracked in two. Iori
tossed his hoe aside and began to weep.
       Musashi ignored him, though he wasn't unmoved. "He's all alone, just as I
am," he thought.
       As though in sympathy with the boy's grief, a twilight breeze swept over
the plain, setting everything astir. The sky darkened and raindrops fell.

        "Come on, Iori, let's go in," called Musashi. "Looks like we're in for a
squall." Hurriedly collecting his tools, he ran for the house. By the time he was
inside, the rain was coming down in gray sheets.
        "Iori," he shouted, surprised that the boy had not come with him. He went
to the window and strained his eyes toward the field. Rain spattered from the sill
into his face. A streak of lightning split the air and struck the earth. As he shut
his eyes and put his hands over his ears, he felt the force of the thunder.
        In the wind and rain, Musashi saw the cryptomeria tree at the Shippōji and
heard the stern voice of Takuan. He felt that whatever he had gained since then
he owed to them. He wanted to possess the tree's immense strength as well as
Takuan's icy, unwavering compassion. If he could be to Iori what the old
cryptomeria had been to him, he would feel he'd succeeded in repaying a part of
his debt to the monk.
        "Iori! ... Iori!"
        There was no answer, only thunder and the rain pounding on the roof.
"Where could he have gone?" he wondered, still unwilling to venture outside.
        When the rain slackened to a drizzle, he did go out. Iori had not moved an
inch. With his clothing clinging to his body and his face still screwed up in an
angry frown, he looked rather like a scarecrow. How could a child be so
stubborn?
        "Idiot!" Musashi chided. "Get back into the house. Being drenched like
that's not exactly good for you. Hurry up, before rivers start forming. Then you
won't be able to get back."
        Iori turned, as though trying to locate Musashi's voice, then started
laughing. "Something bothering you? This kind of rain doesn't last. See, the
clouds are breaking up already."
        Musashi, not expecting to receive a lesson from his pupil, was more than a
little put out, but Iori didn't give the matter a second thought. "Come on," the
boy said, picking up his hoe. "We can still get quite a bit done before the sun's
gone."


      For the next five days, bulbuls and shrikes conversed hoarsely under a
cloudless blue sky, and great cracks grew in the earth as it caked around the roots
of the rushes. On the sixth day, a cluster of small black clouds appeared on the
horizon and rapidly spread across the heavens until the whole plain seemed to be
under an eclipse.

       Iori studied the sky briefly and said in a worried tone, "This time it's the
real thing." Even as he spoke, an inky wind swirled around them. Leaves shook
and little birds dropped to the earth as if felled by a silent and invisible horde of
hunters.
       "Another shower?" Musashi asked.
       "Not with the sky like that. I'd better go to the village. And you'd better
gather up the tools and get inside as fast as you can." Before Musashi could ask
why, Iori took off across the flatlands and was quickly lost in a sea of high grass.
       Again, Iori's weather sense was accurate. The sudden downpour, driven by
a raging, gusty wind, that sent Musashi scurrying for shelter developed its own
distinctive rhythms. The rain fell in unbelievable quantity for a time, stopped
suddenly, then recommenced with even greater fury. Night came, but the storm
continued unabated. It began to seem as though the heavens were set on making
the entire earth into an ocean. Several times Musashi feared that the wind would
rip off the roof; the floor was already littered with shingles torn off its underside.
       Morning came, gray and formless and with no sign of Iori. Musashi stood
by the window, and his heart sank: he could do nothing. Here and there a tree or
a clump of grass was visible; all else was a vast muddy swamp. Luckily, the
cabin was still above water level, but in what had been a dry riverbed
immediately below it, there was now a rushing torrent, carrying along everything
in its path.
       Not knowing for sure that Iori hadn't fallen into the water and drowned,
Musashi felt time drag on, until finally he thought he heard Iori's voice calling,
"Sensei! Here!" He was some distance beyond the river, riding a bullock, with a
great bundle tied behind him.
      Musashi watched in consternation as Iori rode straight into the muddy flow,
      which seemed about to suck him under at every step.
      When he gained the other bank, he was quaking from the cold and wet, but
      he calmly guided the bullock to the side of the cabin.
      "Where have you been?" demanded Musashi, his voice both angry and
      relieved.
       "To the village, of course. I brought back lots of food. It'll rain half a year's
worth before this storm's over, and when it is, we'll be trapped by the
floodwaters."
       After they had taken the straw bundle inside, Iori untied it and removed the
items one by one from the inner wrapping of oiled paper. "Here are some
chestnuts ... lentil beans ... salted fish.... We shouldn't run out of food even if it

takes a month or two for the water to go down."
        Musashi's eyes misted over with gratitude, but he said nothing. He was too
abashed at his own lack of common sense. How could he guide humanity if he
was careless about his own survival? Were it not for Iori, he would now be
facing starvation. And the boy, having been raised in a remote rural area, must
have known about laying in supplies since he was two years old.
        It struck Musashi as odd that the villagers had agreed to furnish all this
food. They couldn't have had very much for themselves. When he recovered his
voice and raised the question, Iori replied, "I left my money pouch in hock and
borrowed from the Tokuganji."
        "And what's the Tokuganji?"
        "It's the temple about two miles from here. My father told me there was
some powdered gold in the pouch. He said if I got into difficulty, I should use it
a little at a time. Yesterday, when the weather turned bad, I remembered what he
said." Iori wore a smile of triumph.
        "Isn't the pouch a keepsake from your father?"
        "Yes. Now that we've burned the old house down, that and the sword are
the only things left." He rubbed the hilt of the short weapon in his obi. Though
the tang bore no craftsman's signature, Musashi had noted when he'd examined
the blade earlier that it was of excellent quality. He also had the feeling that the
inherited pouch had some significance beyond that of the powdered gold it
contained.
        "You shouldn't hand keepsakes over to other people. One of these days, I'll
get it back for you, but after that you must promise not to let go of it."
       "Yes, sir."
       "Where did you spend the night?"
       "The priest told me I'd better wait there till morning."
       "Have you eaten?"
       "No. You haven't either, have you?"
       "No, but there's no firewood, is there?"
        "Oh, there's plenty." He pointed downward, indicating the space under the
cabin, where he'd stored a good supply of sticks and roots and bamboo picked up
while he worked in the fields.
        Holding a piece of straw matting over his head, Musashi crawled under the
cabin and again marveled at the boy's good sense. In an environment like this,
survival depended on foresight and a small mistake could spell the difference
between life and death.

       When they had finished eating, Iori brought out a book. Then, kneeling
formally before his teacher, he said, "While we're waiting for the water to go
down so we can work, would you teach me some reading and writing?"
       Musashi agreed. On such a dismal stormy day, it was a good way to pass
the time. The book was a volume of the Analects of Confucius. Iori said it had
been giyen to him at the temple.
      "Do you really want to study?"
      "Yes."
      "Have you done much reading?"
      "No; only a little."
      "Who taught you?"
      "My father."
      "What have you read?"
       "The Lesser Learning."
       "Did you enjoy it?"
       "Yes, very much," he said eagerly, his eyes brightening.
       "All right then. I'll teach you all I know. Later on, you can find somebody
better educated to teach you what I don't know."
       They devoted the rest of the day to a study session, the boy reading aloud,
Musashi stopping him to correct him or explain words he did not understand.
They sat in utter concentration, oblivious of the storm.
      The deluge lasted two more days, by which time there was no land visible
      anywhere.
      On the following day, it was still raining. Iori, delighted, took out the book
      again and said, "Shall we begin?"
      "Not today. You’ve had enough of reading for a while."
      "Why?"
       "If you do nothing but read, you'll lose sight of the reality around you.
Why don't you take the day off and play? I'm going to relax too."
      "But I can't go outside."
      "Then just do like me," said Musashi, sprawling on his back and crossing
      his arms under his head.
      "Do I have to lie down?"
      "Do what you want. Lie down, stand up, sit—whatever's comfortable."
      "Then what?"
      "I'll tell you a story."
       "I'd like that," said Iori, flopping down on his stomach and wiggling his

legs in the air. "What kind of story?"
        "Let me see," said Musashi, going over the tales he had liked to hear as a
child. He chose the one about the battles between the Genji and the Heike. All
boys loved that.
        Iori proved to be no exception. When Musashi came to the part about the
Genji being defeated and the Heike taking over the country, the boy's face
became gloomy. He had to blink to keep from crying over Lady Tokiwa's sad
fate. But his spirits rose as he heard about Minamoto no Yoshitsune learning
swordsmanship from the "long-nosed goblins" on Mount Kurama and later
making his escape from Kyoto.
        "I like Yoshitsune," he said, sitting up. "Are there really goblins on Mount
Kurama?"
        "Maybe. Anyway, there're people in this world who might as well be
goblins. But the ones who taught Yoshitsune weren't real goblins."
        "What were they?"
        "Loyal vassals of the defeated Genji. They couldn't come out in the open
while the Heike were in power, so they stayed hidden in the mountains until their
chance came."
        "Like my grandfather?"
        "Yes, except he waited all his life, and his chance never came. After
Yoshitsune grew up, the faithful Genji followers who had looked after him
during his childhood got the opportunity they had prayed for."
        "I'll have a chance to make up for my grandfather, won't I?"
        "Hmm. I think it's possible. Yes, I really think so."
        He pulled Iori to him, lifted him up and balanced him on his hands and feet
like a ball. "Now try being a great man!" He laughed.
        Iori giggled, and stammered, "You ... you're a gob-goblin too! Stop ... it.
I'll fa-fall." He reached down and pinched Musashi's nose.


      On the eleventh day, it finally stopped raining. Musashi chafed to be out in
the open, but it was another week before they were able to return to work under
a bright sun. The field they had so arduously carved out of the wilderness had
disappeared without a trace; in its place were rocks, and a river where none had
been before. The water seemed to mock them just as the villagers had.
      Iori, seeing no way to reclaim their loss, looked up and said, "This place is
beyond hope. Let's look for better land somewhere else."

       "No," Musashi said firmly. "With the water drained off, this would make
excellent farmland. I examined the location from every angle before I chose it."
      "What if we have another heavy rain?"
      "We'll fix it so the water doesn't come this way. We'll lay a dam from here
      all the way to that hill over there."
      "That's an awful lot of work."
      "You seem to forget that this is our dōjō. I'm not giving up a foot of this
      land until I see barley growing on it."
       Musashi carried on his stubborn struggle throughout the winter, into the
second month of the new year. It took several weeks of strenuous labor to dig
ditches, drain the water off, pile dirt for a dike and then cover it with heavy
rocks.
       Three weeks later everything was again washed away.
       "Look," Iori said, "we're wasting our energy on something impossible. Is
that the Way of the Sword?" The question struck close to the bone, but Musashi
would not give in.
       Only a month passed before the next disaster, a heavy snowfall followed
by a quick thaw. Iori, on his return from trips to the temple for food, inevitably
wore a long face, for the people there rode him mercilessly about Musashi's
failure. And finally Musashi himself began to lose heart.
       For two full days and on into a third, he sat silently brooding and staring at
his field.
       Then it dawned on him suddenly. Unconsciously, he had been trying to
create a neat, square field like those common in other parts of the Kanto Plain,
but this was not what the terrain called for. Here, despite the general flatness,
there were slight variations in the lay of the land and the quality of the soil that
argued for an irregular shape.
       "What a fool I've been," he exclaimed aloud. "I tried to make the water
flow where I thought it should and force the dirt to stay where I thought it ought
to be. But it didn't work. How could it? Water's water, dirt's dirt. I can't change
their nature. What I've got to do is learn to be a servant to the water and a
protector of the land."
       In his own way, he had submitted to the attitude of the peasants. On that
day he became nature's manservant. He ceased trying to impose his will on
nature and let nature lead the way, while at the same time seeking out
possibilities beyond the grasp of other inhabitants of the plain.
       The snow came again, and another thaw; the muddy water oozed slowly

over the plain. But Musashi had had time to work out his new approach, and his
field remained intact.
       "The same rules must apply to governing people," he said to himself. In
his notebook, he wrote: "Do not attempt to oppose the way of the universe. But
first make sure you know the way of the universe."
