Poisonous Fangs


       From a distance, the torch and its reflection suggested a pair of firebirds
swimming across the serene surface of Nobu Pond.
       "Somebody coming!" whispered Matahachi. "All right, we'll go this way,"
he said, tugging at the rope he had tied Otsū with. "Come on!"
      "I'm not going anywhere," protested Otsū, digging in her heels. "Stand up!"
      With the end of the rope, he lashed her across the back, then lashed and
      lashed again. But every stroke reinforced her resistance.
      Matahachi lost heart. "Come on now," he implored. "Please walk."
       When she still refused to stand, his anger flared again and he seized her by
the collar. "You'll come whether you like it or not."
       Otsū tried to turn toward the pond and scream, but he quickly gagged her
with a hand towel. Eventually he managed to drag her to a tiny shrine hidden
among the willows.
       Otsū, yearning to have her hands free to attack her abductor, thought how
wonderful it would be to be transformed into a snake, like the one she could see
painted on a plaque. It was coiled around a willow, hissing at a man who was
putting a curse on it.
       "That was lucky." Sighing with relief, he pushed her into the shrine and
leaned heavily against the outside of the grille door, intently watching the little
boat coast into an inlet some four hundred yards away.
       His day had been totally exhausting. When he'd tried to use brute force to
take her, she'd made it clear she'd rather die than submit. She'd even threatened
to bite off her tongue, and Matahachi knew her well enough to know it was no
empty threat. His frustration brought him to the verge of committing murder, but
the very notion sapped his strength and cooled his lust.
       He couldn't fathom why she loved Musashi instead of him, when it had,
for so long, been the other way around. Didn't women prefer him to his old
friend? Hadn't they always? Hadn't Okō been immediately drawn to Matahachi
when they'd first met her? Of course she had. Only one explanation was
possible: Musashi was slandering him behind his back. Pondering his betrayal,
Matahachi worked himself into a fury.
       "What a stupid, gullible ass I am! How could I have let him make such a

fool of me? To think I was in tears listening to him talk about undying
friendship, about how he treasured it! Ha!"
        He upbraided himself for ignoring Sasaki Kojirō's warning, which
resounded in his ears. "Trust that scoundrel Musashi and you'll live to regret it."
        Until today he'd wavered between liking and disliking his childhood
friend, but now he loathed him. And although he couldn't bring himself to voice
it, a solemn prayer for Musashi's eternal damnation took form in his heart.
        He had become convinced that Musashi was his enemy, born to thwart him
at every turn and eventually destroy him. "The lousy hypocrite," he thought. "He
sees me after such a long time and starts preaching about being a real human
being, tells me to buck up, that we'll go on from here hand in hand, friends for
life. I remember every word—can see him saying it all so sincerely. It makes me
sick just to think about it. He was probably laughing to himself the whole time.
        "The so-called good people of this world are all phonies like Musashi," he
reassured himself. "Well, I see through them now. They can't fool me anymore.
Studying a lot of silly books and putting up with all sorts of hardship just to
become another hypocrite is nonsense. From now on, they can tell me whatever
they please. If I have to be a villain to do it, one way or another I'll stop that
bastard from making a name for himself. For the rest of his life, I'll stand in his
way!"
       He turned around and kicked the grille door in. Then he untied her gag and
       said coldly, "Still crying, are you?"
       She did not answer.
       "Answer me! Answer the question I asked you before."
        Enraged by her silence, he kicked her dark form on the floor. She moved
out of range and said, "I have nothing to say to you. If you're going to kill me, do
it like a man."
        "Don't talk like a fool! I've made up my mind. You and Musashi have
ruined my life, and I'm going to get even no matter how long it takes."
        "That's nonsense. Nobody led you astray but you yourself. Of course, you
may have had a little help from that Okō woman."
       "Watch what you're saying!"
       "Oh, you and your mother! What is it about your family? Why do you
       always have to go around hating somebody?"
       "You talk too much! What I want to know is, are you going to marry me or
       not?"
       "I can answer that question easily."

      "Well, answer then."
       "Throughout this lifetime and the eternal future, my heart is bound to one
man, Miyamoto Musashi. How can I possibly care for anyone else, let alone a
weakling like you. I hate you!"
       A trembling swept over his body. With a cruel laugh, he said, "So you hate
me, do you? Well, that's too bad, because whether you like me or not, from this
night on, your body is mine!"
      Otsū shook with anger.
      "You still want to be difficult about it?"
      "I was brought up in a temple. I never saw my father or mother. Death
      doesn't frighten me in the least."
       "Are you joking?" he growled, as he dropped to the floor beside her and
pressed his face toward hers. "Who said anything about death? Killing you
wouldn't give me any satisfaction. This is what I'm going to do!" Seizing her
shoulder and her left wrist, he sank his teeth right through her sleeve and into her
upper arm.
       Screaming and writhing about, she tried to free herself but only tightened
the hold of his teeth on her arm. He did not release her even when blood dribbled
down to the wrist he was holding.
       Face stark white, she fainted from the pain. Feeling her body grow limp,
he let go and hastily forced open her mouth to make sure she hadn't actually
bitten off her tongue. Her face was bathed in sweat.
       "Otsū," he wailed. "Forgive me!" He shook her until she came to.
       The moment she was able to speak, she stretched out full length and
groaned hysterically. "Oh, it hurts! It hurts so! Jōtarō, Jōtarō, help me!"
       Matahachi, pale and gasping for breath, said, "Does it hurt? Too bad! Even
after it heals, the mark of my teeth will be there for a long time. What'll people
say when they see that? What'll Musashi think? I put that there as a brand, so
everyone'll know that one of these days you'll belong to me. If you want to run
away, run, but you'll never stop being reminded of me."
       In the dark shrine, slightly hazy with dust, the silence was broken only by
Otsū’s sobbing.
       "Stop blubbering. It gets on my nerves. I'm not going to touch you, so just
be quiet. Do you want me to bring you some water?" He took an earthen bowl
from the altar and started to go out.
       He was surprised to see a man standing outside, looking in. When the man
took to his heels, Matahachi bounded through the door and grabbed him.

       The man, a farmer on his way to the wholesale market in Shiojiri with
several sacks of grain packed on his horse's back, fell at Matahachi's feet,
quaking with terror. "I wasn't going to do anything. I just heard a woman crying
and looked in to see what happened."
       "Is that so? Are you sure?" His manner was as stern as a local magistrate's.
"Yes; I swear it is."
       "If that's the case, I'll let you off alive. Take those sacks off the horse's
back and tie the woman on it. Then you'll stay with us until I'm through with
you." His fingers played menacingly with his sword hilt.
       The farmer, too frightened to disobey, did as he was told, and the three of
them started off.
       Matahachi picked up a bamboo stick to use as a whip. "We're going to Edo
and we don't want any company, so stay away from the main road," he ordered.
"Take a road where we won't run into anybody."
       "That's very difficult."
       "I don't care how difficult it is! Take a back road. We'll go to Ina and from
there to Kōshū without using the main highway."
       "But that means climbing a very bad mountain path from Ubagami to
Gombei Pass."
       "All right, start climbing! And don't try any tricks, or I'll split your skull
open. I don't particularly need you. All I want is the horse. You should be
thankful I'm taking you along."
       The dark path seemed to get steeper with every step. By the time they
reached Ubagami, about halfway up, both men and horse were ready to drop.
Beneath their feet, clouds billowed like waves. A faint trace of light tinged the
eastern sky.
       Otsū had ridden all night without uttering a word, but when she saw the
rays of the sun, she said quietly, "Matahachi, please let the man go. Give him
back his horse. I promise not to run away."
       Matahachi was reluctant, but she repeated her plea a third and fourth time,
and he gave in. As the farmer went away, Matahachi said to Otsū, "Now, you
just come along quietly, and don't try to escape."
       She placed her hand over the injured arm, and biting her lip, said, "I won't.
You don't think I want anyone to see the marks of your venomous fangs on me,
do you?"
