The Fox


      "Is this Kobikichō?"
      In spite of repeated assurances that it was, Iori still had his doubts. The
only lights visible on the broad expanse of land belonged to the makeshift huts
of woodworkers and stonemasons, and these were few and far between. Beyond
them, in the distance, he could just make out the foaming white waves of the
bay.
      Near the river were piles of rocks and stacks of lumber, and although Iori
knew that buildings were going up at a furious pace all over Edo, it struck him as
unlikely that Lord Yagyū would build his residence in an area like this.
      "Where to next?" he thought dejectedly as he sat down on some lumber.
His feet were tired and burning. To cool them he wiggled his toes in the dewy
grass. Soon his tension ebbed away and the sweat dried, but his spirits remained
decidedly damp.
      "It's all the fault of that old woman at the inn," he muttered to himself.
"She didn't know what she was talking about." The time he himself had spent
gawking at the sights in the theater district at Sakaichō conveniently slipped his
mind.
      The hour was late, and there was no one around from whom he could ask
directions. Yet the idea of spending the night in these unfamiliar surroundings
made him uneasy. He had to complete his errand and return to the inn before
daybreak, even if it meant waking up one of the workers.
      As he approached the nearest shack where a light showed, he saw a
woman with a strip of matting tied over her head like a shawl.
      "Good evening, auntie," he said innocently.
      Mistaking him for the helper at a nearby sake shop, the woman glared and
sniffed, "You, is it? You threw a rock at me and ran away, didn't you, you little
brat?"
      "Not me," protested Iori. "I've never seen you before!"
      The woman came hesitantly toward him, then burst out laughing. "No,"
she said, "you're not the one. What's a cute little boy like you doing wandering
around here at this time of night?"
      "I was sent on an errand, but I can't find the house I'm looking for."

"Whose house is it?"
       "Lord Yagyū of Tajima's."
       "Are you joking?" She laughed. "Lord Yagyū is a daimyō, and a teacher to
the shōgun. Do you think he'd open his gate to you?" She laughed again. "You
know somebody in the servants' quarters perhaps?"
      "I've brought a letter."
      "Who to?"
      "A samurai named Kimura Sukekurō."
      "Must be one of his retainers. But you, you're so funny—throwing Lord
      Yagyū's name around like you knew him."
      "I just want to deliver this letter. If you know where the house is, tell me."
       "It's on the other side of the moat. If you cross that bridge over there, you'll
be in front of Lord Kii's house. The next one is Lord Kyōgoku, then Lord Katō,
then Lord Matsudaira of Suō." Holding up her fingers, she counted off the sturdy
storehouses on the opposite bank. "I'm sure the one after that is the one you
want."
      "If I cross the moat, will I still be in Kobikichō?"
      "Of course."
      "Of all the stupid—"
      "Here now, that's no way to talk. Hmm, you seem such a nice boy, I'll come
      along and show you Lord Yagyū's place."
      Walking in front of him with the matting on her head, she looked to Iori
      rather like a ghost.
       They were in the middle of the bridge when a man coming toward them
brushed against her sleeve and whistled. He reeked of sake. Before Iori knew
what was going on, the woman turned and made for the drunk. "I know you,"
she warbled. "Don't just pass me by like that. It isn't nice." She grabbed his
sleeve and started toward a place from which they could go below the bridge.
      "Let go," he said.
      "Wouldn't you like to go with me?"
      "No money."
       "Oh, I don't care." Latching on to him like a leech, she looked back at
Iori's startled face and said, "Run along now. I've got business with this
gentleman."
       Iori watched in bewilderment as the two of them tugged back and forth.
After a few moments, the woman appeared to get the upper hand, and they
disappeared below the bridge. Still puzzled, Iori went to the railing and looked

over at the grassy riverbank.
       Glancing up, the woman shouted, "Nitwit!" and picked up a rock.
       Swallowing hard, Iori dodged the missile and made for, the far end of the
bridge. In all his years on the barren plain of Hōtengahara, he had never seen
anything so frightening as the woman's angry white face in the dark.
       On the other side of the river, he found himself before a storehouse. Next
to that was a fence, then another storehouse, then another fence, and so on down
the street. "This must be it," he said when he came to the fifth building. On the
gleaming white plaster wall was a crest in the form of a two-tiered woman's hat.
This, Iori knew from the words of a popular song, was the Yagyū family crest.
       "Who's there?" demanded a voice from inside the gate.
       Speaking as loudly as he dared, Iori announced, "I'm the pupil of
Miyamoto Musashi. I've brought a letter."
       The sentry said a few words Iori could not catch. In the gate was a small
door, through which people could be let in and out without opening the great
gate itself. After a few seconds, the door slowly opened, and the man asked
suspiciously, "What are you doing here at this hour?"
      Iori thrust the letter at the guard's face. "Please deliver this for me. If there's
      an answer, I'll take it back."
      "Hmm," mused the man, taking the letter. "This is for Kimura Sukekurō, is
      it?"
      "Yes, sir."
      "He's not here."
      "Where is he?"
      "He's at the house in Higakubo."
      "Huh? Everybody told me Lord Yagyū's house was in Kobikichō."
      "People say that, but there're only storehouses here—rice, lumber and a few
      other things."
      "Lord Yagyū doesn't live here?"
      "That's right."
      "How far is it to the other place—Higakubo?"
      "Pretty far."
      "Just where is it?"
      "In the hills outside the city, in Azabu Village."
       "Never heard of it." Iori sighed disappointedly, but his sense of
responsibility prevented him from giving up. "Sir, would you draw me a map?"
      "Don't be silly. Even if you knew the way, it'd take you all night to get

     there."
     "I don't mind."
     "Lot of foxes in Azabu. You don't want to be bewitched by a fox, do you?"
     "No."
     "Do you know Sukekurō well?"
     "My teacher does."
       "I'll tell you what. Since it's so late, why don't you catch some sleep over
there in the granary, and go in the morning?"


      "Where am I?" exclaimed Iori, rubbing his eyes. He jumped up and ran
outside. The afternoon sun made him dizzy. Squinting his eyes against the glare,
he went to the gatehouse, where the guard was eating his lunch.
     "So you're finally up."
     "Yes, sir. Could you draw me that map now?"
     "You in a hurry, Sleepyhead? Here, you'd better have something to eat first.
     There's enough for both of us."
      While the boy chewed and gulped, the guard sketched a rough map and
explained how to get to Higakubo. They finished simultaneously, and Iori, fired
up with the importance of his mission, set off at a run, never thinking that
Musashi might be worried about his failure to return to the inn.
      He made good time through the busy thoroughfares until he reached the
vicinity of Edo Castle, where the imposing houses of the leading daimyō stood
on the land built up between the crisscross system of moats. As he looked
around, his pace slowed. The waterways were jammed with cargo boats. The
stone ramparts of the castle itself were half covered with log scaffolding, which
from a distance resembled the bamboo trellises used for growing morning
glories.
      He dawdled again in a broad, flat area called Hibiya, where the scraping of
chisels and the thud of axes raised a dissonant hymn to the power of the new
shogunate.
      Iori stopped. He was mesmerized by the spectacle of the construction
work: the laborers hauling huge rocks, the carpenters with their planes and saws
and the samurai, the dashing samurai, who stood proudly supervising it all. How
he wanted to grow up and be like them!
      A lusty song rose from the throats of the men hauling rocks:

     We'll pluck the flowers
     In the fields of Musashi—
     The gentians, the bellflowers,
     Wild blossoms splashed
     In confusing disarray.
     And that lovely girl,
     The flower unpluckable,
     Moistened by the dew—
     'Twill only dampen your sleeve, like falling tears.


       He stood enchanted. Before he realized it, the water in the moats was
taking on a reddish cast and the evening voices of crows reached his ears.
       "Oh, no, it's nearly sundown," he chastised himself. He sped away and for
a time moved along at full speed, paying attention to nothing save the map the
guard had drawn for him. Before he knew it, he was climbing the path up Azabu
Hill, which was so thickly overhung with trees it might as well have been
midnight. Once he reached the top, however, he could see the sun was still in the
sky, though low on the horizon.
       There were almost no houses on the hill itself, Azabu Village being a mere
scattering of fields and farm dwellings in the valley below. Standing in a sea of
grass and ancient trees, listening to the brooks gurgling down the hillside, Iori
felt his fatigue give way to a strange refreshment. He was vaguely aware that the
spot where he was standing was historic, although he didn't know why. In fact it
was the very place that had given birth to the great warrior clans of the past, both
the Taira and the Minamoto.
       He heard the loud booming of a drum being beaten, the kind often used at
Shinto festivals. Down the hill, visible in the forest, were the sturdy cross-logs
atop the ridgepole of a religious sanctuary. Had Iori but known, it was the Great
Shrine of Iigura he'd studied about, the famous edifice sacred to the sun goddess
of Ise.
       The shrine was a far cry from the enormous castle he had just seen, even
from the stately gates of the daimyō. In its simplicity it was almost
indistinguishable from the farmhouses around it, and Iori thought it puzzling that
people talked more reverently about the Tokugawa family than they did about
the most sacred of deities. Did that mean the Tokugawas were greater than the

sun goddess? he wondered. "I'll have to ask Musashi about that when I get
back."
       Taking out his map, he pored over it, looked about him and stared at it
again. Still there was no sign of the Yagyū mansion.
       The evening mist spreading over the ground gave him an eerie feeling.
He'd felt something similar before, when in a room with the shoji shut the setting
sun's light played on the rice paper so that the interior seemed to grow lighter as
the outside darkened. Of course, such a twilight illusion is just that, but he felt it
so strongly, in several flashes, that he rubbed his eyes as if to erase his light-
headedness. He knew he wasn't dreaming and looked around suspiciously.
       "Why, you sneaky bastard," he cried, jumping forward and whipping out
his sword. In the same motion he cut through a clump of tall grass in front of
him.
       With a yelp of pain, a fox leapt from its hiding place and streaked off, its
tail glistening with blood from a cut on its hindquarters.
       "Devilish beast!" Iori set off in hot pursuit, and though the fox was fast,
Iori was too. When the limping creature stumbled, Iori lunged, confident of
victory. The fox, however, slipped nimbly away, to surge ahead several yards,
and no matter how fast Iori attacked, the animal managed to get away each time.
       On his mother's knee, Iori had heard countless tales proving beyond a
shadow of a doubt that foxes had the power to bewitch and possess human
beings. He was fond of most other animals, even wild boar and noisome
possums, but foxes he hated. He was also afraid of them. To his way of thinking,
coming across this wily creature lurking in the grass could mean only one thing
—it was to blame for his not finding his way. He was convinced it was a
treacherous and evil being that had been following him since the night before
and had, just moments before, cast its malevolent spell over him. If he didn't slay
it now, it was sure to hex him again. Iori was prepared to pursue his quarry to the
end of the earth, but the fox, bounding over the edge of a drop, was lost to sight
in a thicket.
       Dew glistened on the flowers of the dog nettle and spiderwort. Exhausted
and parched, Iori sank down and licked the moisture from a mint leaf. Shoulders
heaving, he finally caught his breath, whereupon sweat poured copiously from
his forehead. His heart thumped violently. "Where did it go?" he asked, his voice
halfway between a scream and a choke.
       If the fox had really gone, so much the better, but Iori didn't know what to
believe. Since he had injured the animal, he felt it was certain to take revenge,

one way or another. Resigning himself, he sat still and waited.
       Just as he was beginning to feel calmer, an eerie sound floated to his ears.
Wide-eyed, he looked around. "It's the fox, for sure," he said, steeling himself
against being bewitched. Rising quickly, he moistened his eyebrows with saliva
—a trick thought to ward off the influence of foxes.
       A short distance away, a woman came floating through the evening mist,
her face half hidden by a veil of silk gauze. She was riding a horse sidesaddle,
the reins lying loosely across the low pommel. The saddle was made of
lacquered wood with mother-of-pearl inlay.
       "It's changed into a woman," thought Iori. This vision in a veil, playing a
flute and silhouetted against the thin rays of the evening sun, could by no stretch
of the imagination be a creature of this world.
       As he squatted in the grass like a frog, Iori heard an otherworldly voice
call, "Otsū!" and was sure it had come from one of the fox's companions.
       The rider had nearly reached a turnoff, where a road diverged to the south,
and the upper part of her body glowed reddish. The sun, sinking behind the hills
of Shibuya, was fringed by clouds.
       If he killed her, he could expose her true fox form. Iori tightened his grip
on the sword and braced himself, thinking: "Lucky it doesn't know I'm hiding
here." Like all those acquainted with the truth about foxes, he knew the animal's
spirit would be situated a few feet behind its human form. He swallowed hard in
anticipation, while waiting for the vision to proceed and make the turn to the
south.
       But when the horse reached the turnoff, the woman stopped playing, put
her flute in a cloth wrapper and tucked it into her obi. Lifting her veil, she peered
about with searching eyes.
       "Otsū!" the voice called again.
       A pleasant smile came to her face as she called back, "Here I am, Hyōgo.
Up here."
       Iori watched as a samurai came up the road from the valley. "Oh, oh!" he
gasped when he noticed that the man walked with a slight limp. This was the fox
he had wounded; no doubt about it! Disguised not as a beautiful temptress but as
a handsome samurai. The apparition terrified Iori. He shivered violently and wet
himself.
       After the woman and the samurai had exchanged a few words, the samurai
took hold of the horse's bit and led it right past the place where Iori was hiding.
       "Now's the time," he decided, but his body would not respond.

       The samurai noticed a slight motion and looked around, his gaze falling
squarely on Iori's petrified face. The light from the samurai's eyes seemed more
brilliant than the edge of the setting sun. Iori prostrated himself and buried his
face in the grass. Never in his entire fourteen years had he experienced such
terror.
       Hyōgo, seeing nothing alarming about the boy, walked on. The slope was
steep, and he had to lean back to keep the horse in check. Looking over his
shoulder at Otsū, he asked gently, "Why are you so late? You've been gone a
long time just to have ridden to the shrine and back. My uncle got worried and
sent me to look for you."
       Without answering, Otsū jumped down from the horse.
       Hyōgo stopped. "Why are you getting off? Something wrong?"
       "No, but it's not fitting for a woman to ride when a man's walking. Let's
walk together. We can both hold the bit." She took her place on the other side of
the horse.
       They descended into the darkening valley and passed a sign reading:
"Sendan'en Academy for Priests of the Sōdō Zen Sect." The sky was filling with
stars, and the Shibuya River could be heard in the distance. The river divided the
valley into North Higakubo and South Higakubo. Since the school, established
by the monk Rintatsu, lay on the north slope, the priests were casually referred to
as the "fellows of the north." The "fellows of the south" were the men studying
swordsmanship under Yagyū Munenori, whose establishment was directly across
the valley.
       As Yagyū Sekishūsai's favorite among his sons and grandsons, Yagyū
Hyōgo enjoyed a special status among the "fellows of the south." He had also
distinguished himself in his own right. At the age of twenty, he had been
summoned by the famous general Katō Kiyomasa and given a position at
Kumamoto Castle in Higo Province at a stipend of fifteen thousand bushels. This
was unheard of for a man so young, but after the Battle of Sekigahara, Hyōgo
began to have second thoughts about his status, because of the danger inherent in
having to side with either the Tokugawas or the Osaka faction. Three years
earlier, using his grandfather's illness as a pretext, he had taken a leave of
absence from Kumamoto and returned to Yamato. After that, saying he needed
more training, he had traveled about the countryside for a time.
       He and Otsū had been thrown together by chance the previous year, when
he had come to stay with his uncle. For more than three years prior to that, Otsū
had led a precarious existence, never quite able to escape from Matahachi, who

had dragged her along everywhere, glibly telling prospective employers that she
was his wife. Had he been willing to work as an apprentice to a carpenter or a
plasterer or a stonemason, he could have found employment on the day they
arrived in Edo, but he preferred to imagine they could work together at softer
jobs, she as a domestic servant perhaps, he as a clerk or accountant.
       Finding no takers for his services, they had managed to survive by doing
odd jobs. And as the months passed, Otsū, hoping to lull her tormentor into
complacency, had given in to him in every way short of surrendering her body.
       Then one day they had been walking along the street when they
encountered a daimyō's procession. Along with everyone else, they moved to the
side of the road and assumed a properly respectful attitude.
       The palanquins and lacquered strongboxes bore the Yagyū crest. Otsū had
raised her eyes enough to see this, and memories of Sekishūsai and the happy
days at Koyagyū Castle flooded her heart. If only she were back in that peaceful
land of Yamato now! With Matahachi at her side, she could only stare blankly
after the passing retinue.
       "Otsū, isn't that you?" The conical sedge hat came low over the samurai's
face, but as he drew closer, Otsū had seen that it was Kimura Sukekurō, a man
she remembered with affection and respect. She couldn't have been more amazed
or thankful if he had been the Buddha himself, surrounded by the wondrous light
of infinite compassion. Slipping away from Matahachi's side, she had hurried to
Sukekurō, who promptly offered to take her home with him.
       When Matahachi had opened his mouth to protest, Sukekurō said
peremptorily, "If you have anything to say, come to Higakubo and say it there."
       Powerless before the prestigious House of Yagyū, Matahachi held his
tongue, biting his lower lip in angry frustration as he sullenly watched his
precious treasure escape from him.
