The Deserted Prophet


       The forest around the Hirakawa Tenjin Shrine was alive with the hum of
cicadas. An owl hooted as Musashi walked from the gate to the entrance hall of
the Obata house.
       "Good day!" he called, but his greeting echoed back as though from an
empty cavern.
       After a time, he heard footsteps. The young samurai who emerged wearing
his two swords was clearly no mere underling assigned to answer the door.
       Without bothering to kneel, he said, "May I ask your name?" Though no
more than twenty-four or -five, he gave the impression of being someone to be
reckoned with.
       "My name is Miyamoto Musashi. Am I correct in thinking this is Obata
Kagenori's academy of military science?"
       "That's right," came the reply, in clipped tones. From the samurai's manner,
it was evident he expected Musashi to explain how he was traveling around to
perfect his knowledge of the martial arts, and so on.
       "One of the students from your school has been wounded in a fight," said
Musashi. "He's now being cared for by the sword polisher Zushino Kōsuke,
whom I believe you know. I came at Kōsuke's request."
       "It must be Shinzō!" There were fleeting signs of severe shock, but the
youth recovered immediately. "Forgive me. I'm Kagenori's only son, Yogorō.
Thank you for taking the trouble to come and tell us. Is Shinzō's life in danger?"
       "He seemed better this morning, but it's still too early for him to be moved.
I think it'd be wise to let him stay at Kōsuke's house for the time being."
       "I hope you'll convey our thanks to Kōsuke."
       "I'd be happy to."
       "To tell the truth, since my father is bedridden, Shinzō was lecturing in his
stead, until last fall when he suddenly left. As you can see, there's almost nobody
here now. I regret we're not able to receive you properly."
       "Of course; but tell me, is there a feud going on between your school and
Sasaki Kojirō?"
       "Yes. I was away when it started, so I don't know all the details, but
apparently Kojirō insulted my father, which of course incited the students. They

took it upon themselves to punish Kojirō, but he killed several of them. As I
understand it, Shinzō left because he finally came to the conclusion that he
himself should take revenge."
       "I see. It's beginning to make sense. I'd like to give you a bit of advice.
Don't fight Kojirō. He can't be beaten by ordinary sword techniques, and he's
even less vulnerable to clever strategy. As a fighter, as a speaker, as a strategist,
he's without rival, even among the greatest masters alive today."
       This assessment brought a burst of angry fire to Yogorō's eyes. Observing
this, Musashi felt it prudent to repeat his warning. "Let the proud have their day,"
he added. "It's senseless to risk disaster over a trivial grievance. Don't entertain
the idea that Shinzō's defeat makes it necessary for you to settle the score. If you
do, you'll simply follow in his footsteps. That would be foolish, very foolish."
       After Musashi was out of sight, Yogorō leaned against the wall with his
arms folded. Softly, in a faintly tremulous voice, he muttered, "To think it's come
to this. Even Shinzō has failed!" Gazing vacantly at the ceiling, he thought of the
letter Shinzō had left for him, in which he'd said that his purpose in leaving was
to kill Kojirō and that if he did not succeed, Yogorō would probably never see
him alive again.
       That Shinzō was not dead did not make his defeat any less humiliating.
With the school forced to suspend operations, the public in general had
concluded that Kojirō was right: the Obata Academy was a school for cowards,
or at best for theoreticians devoid of practical ability. This had led to the
desertion of some of the students. Others, apprehensive over Kagenori's illness
or the apparent decline of the Kōshū Style, had switched to the rival Naganuma
Style. Only two or three were still in residence.
       Yogorō decided not to tell his father about Shinzō. It seemed that the only
course open to him was to nurse the old man as best he could, although the
doctor's opinion was that recovery was out of the question.
       "Yogorō, where are you?"
       It was a source of constant amazement to Yogorō that although Kagenori
was at death's door, when an impulse moved him to summon his son, his voice
became that of a perfectly healthy man.
       "Coming." He ran to the sickroom, fell to his knees and said, "You called?"
       As he often did when he was tired of lying flat on his back, Kagenori had
propped himself up by the window, using his pillow as an armrest. "Who was the
samurai who just went out the gate?" he asked.
      "Huh," said Yogorō, somewhat flustered. "Oh, him. Nobody in particular.

      He was just a messenger."
      "Messenger from where?"
      "Well, it seems Shinzō has had an accident. The samurai came to tell us. He
      gave his name as Miyamoto Musashi."
      "Mm. He wasn't born in Edo, was he?"
      "No. I've heard he's from Mimasaka. He's a rōnin. Did you think you
      recognized him?"
       "No," Kagenori replied with a vigorous shake of his thin gray beard. "I
don't recall ever having seen or heard of him. But there's something about him....
I've met a lot of people during my lifetime, you know, on the battlefield as well
as in ordinary life. Some were very good people, people I valued greatly. But the
ones I could consider to be genuine samurai, in every sense of the term, were
very few. This man—Musashi, did you say?—appealed to me. I'd like to meet
him, talk to him a little. Go bring him back."
       "Yes, sir," Yogorō answered obediently, but before getting to his feet, he
continued in a slightly puzzled tone: "What was it you noticed about him? You
only saw him from a distance."
       "You wouldn't understand. When you do, you'll be old and withered like
me.
       "But there must have been something."
       "I admired his alertness. He wasn't taking any chances, even on a sick old
man like me. When he came through the gate, he paused and looked around—at
the layout of the house, at the windows, whether they were open or closed, at the
path to the garden—everything. He took it all in at a single glance. There was
nothing unnatural about it. Anyone would have assumed he was simply halting
for a moment as a sign of deference. I was amazed."
       "Then you believe he's a samurai of real merit?"
       "Perhaps. I'm sure he'd be a fascinating man to talk to. Call him back."
       "Aren't you afraid it'll be bad for you?" Kagenori had become quite
excited, and Yogorō was reminded of the doctor's warning that his father
shouldn't talk for any length of time.
       "Don't worry your head about my health. I've been waiting for years to
meet a man like that. I didn't study military science all this time to teach it to
children. I grant that my theories of military science are called the Kōshū Style,
but they're not simply an extension of the formulas used by the famous Kōshū
warriors. My ideas differ from those of Takeda Shingen, or Uesugi Kenshin, or
Oda Nobunaga, or the other generals who were fighting for control of the

country. The purpose of military science has changed since then. My theory is
directed toward the achievement of peace and stability. You know some of these
things, but the question is, whom can I entrust my ideas to?"
       Yogorō was silent.
       "My son, while there are many things I want to pass on to you, you're still
immature, too immature to recognize the remarkable qualities of the man you
just met."
       Yogorō dropped his eyes but endured the criticism in silence.
       "If even I, inclined as I am to look favorably on everything you do, see you
as immature, then there's no doubt in my mind. You're not yet the person who
can carry on my work, so I must find the right man and entrust your future to
him. I've been waiting for the right person to come along. Remember, when the
cherry blossom falls, it must rely on the wind to spread its pollen."
       "You mustn't fall, Father. You must try to live."
       The old man glared and raised his head. "Talk like that proves you're still a
child! Now go quickly and find the samurai!"
      "Yes, sir!"
      "Don't push him. Just tell him roughly what I've told you, and bring him
      back with you."
      "Right away, Father."
       Yogorō departed on the run. Once outside, he first tried the direction he'd
seen Musashi take. Then he looked all over the shrine grounds, even went out to
the main street running through Kōjimachi, but to no avail.
       He was not unduly disturbed, for he was not as thoroughly convinced as
his father of Musashi's superiority, nor was he grateful for Musashi's warning.
The talk about Kojirō's unusual ability, about the folly of "risking disaster over a
trivial grievance" had stuck in his craw. It was as though Musashi's visit had
been for the express purpose of singing Kojirō's praises.
       Even while listening submissively to his father, he had been thinking to
himself: "I'm not as young and immature as you say." And the truth was that just
then, he really couldn't have cared less what Musashi thought.
       They were about the same age. Even if Musashi's talent was exceptional,
there were limits to what he could know and what he could do. In the past,
Yogorō had gone away for a year, two years, even three, to lead the life of the
ascetic shugyōsha. He had lived and studied for a while at the school of another
military expert, and he had studied Zen under a strict master. Yet his father, after
merely catching a glimpse of the man, had not only formed what Yogorō

suspected was an exaggerated opinion of the unknown rōnin's worth but had
gone so far as to suggest that Yogorō take Musashi as a model.
      "May as well go back," he thought sadly. "I suppose there's no way to
convince a parent that his son is no longer a child." He longed desperately for the
day when Kagenori would look at him and suddenly see that he was both a
grown man and a brave samurai. It pained him to think that his father might die
before that day arrived.
      "Hey, Yogorō! It is Yogorō, isn't it?"
      Yogorō turned on his heel and saw that the voice belonged to Nakatogawa
Handayū, a samurai from the House of Hosokawa. They had not seen each other
recently, but there had been a time when Handayū had attended Kagenori's
lectures regularly.
     "How's our revered teacher's health? Official duties keep me so busy I
     haven't had time to call."
     "He's about the same, thanks."
     "Say, I hear Hōjō Shinzō attacked Sasaki Kojirō and was beaten." "You've
     heard that already?"
     "Yes; they were talking about it at Lord Hosokawa's this morning." "It only
     happened last night."
     "Kojirō's a guest of Iwama Kakubei. Kakubei must have passed the word
     around. Even Lord Tadatoshi knew about it."
      Yogorō was too young to listen with detachment, yet he was loath to reveal
his anger by some involuntary twitch. Taking leave of Handayū as quickly as
possible, he hurried home.
      His mind was made up.
