A Maternal Warning


        "Mother," said Gonnosuke, "you're going too far. Can't you see I'm upset
too?" He was weeping, and the words came in spurts.
        "Shh! You'll wake him." His mother's voice was soft but stern. She might
have been scolding a three-year-old. "If you feel so bad, the only thing to do is
get a firm grip on yourself and follow the Way with all your heart. Crying won't
do any good. Besides, it's unbecoming. Wipe your face."
        "First promise you'll forgive me for that shameful performance yesterday."
        "Well, I couldn't help scolding you, but I suppose after all it's a matter of
skill. They say the longer a man goes without facing a challenge, the weaker he
becomes. It's only natural you lost."
        "Hearing that from you makes it all the worse. After all your
encouragement, I still lost. I see now I don't have the talent or spirit to be a real
warrior. I'll have to give up the martial arts and be content with being a farmer. I
can do more for you with my hoe than I can with my staff."
        Musashi was already awake. He sat straight up, amazed that the young
man and his mother had taken the skirmish so seriously. He himself had already
brushed it off as a mistake on his part as well as Gonnosuke's. "What a sense of
honor," he mumbled as he crept quietly into the next room. He went to the far
side and put his eye to the crack between the shoji panels.
        Faintly lit by the rising sun, Gonnosuke's mother was seated with her back
to the Buddhist altar. Gonnosuke was kneeling meekly before her, his eyes
downcast and his face streaked with tears.
        Grabbing the back of his collar, she said with vehemence, "What did you
say? What's this about spending your life as a farmer?" Pulling him closer, until
his head rested on her knees, she continued in an outraged tone. "Only one
thing's kept me going all these years—the hope that I could make a samurai of
you and restore our family's good name. So I had you read all those books and
learn the martial arts. And that's why I’ve managed to live all these years on so
little. And now ... now you say you're going throw it all away!"
        She, too, began to weep. "Since you let him get the best of you, you have
to think of vindicating yourself. He's still here. When he wakes up, challenge
him to another bout. That's the only way you can regain your self-confidence."

       Gonnosuke, lifting his head, said sadly, "If I could do that, Mother, I
wouldn't feel the way I do now."
       "What's the matter with you? You're not acting like yourself. Where's your
spirit?"
       "Last night, when I went with him to the pond, I kept my eye open for a
chance to attack him, but I couldn't bring myself to do it. I kept telling myself he
was only a nameless rōnin. Still, when I took a good look at him, my arm
refused to move."
       "That's because you're thinking like a coward."
       "What of it? Look, I know I've got the blood of a Kiso samurai in me. I
haven't forgotten how I prayed before the god of Ontake for twenty-one days."
       "Didn't you swear before the god of Ontake that you'd use your staff to
create your own school?"
       "Yes, but I guess I've been too complacent. I haven't considered that other
men know how to fight too. If I'm as immature as I showed myself to be
yesterday, how could I ever establish a school of my own? Rather than live in
poverty and see you hungry, it'd be better to break my staff in half and forget
about it."
       "You've never lost before, and you've had a number of matches. Maybe the
god of Ontake intended yesterday's defeat as a lesson to you. Maybe you're
being punished for being overconfident. Giving up the staff to take better care of
me isn't the way to make me happy. When that rōnin wakes up, challenge him. If
you lose again, then's the time to break your staff and forget your ambitions."
       Musashi went back to his room to give the matter some thought. If
Gonnosuke challenged him, he'd have to fight. And if he fought, he knew he'd
win. Gonnosuke would be crushed, his mother heartbroken.
       "There's nothing to do but avoid it," he concluded.
       Noiselessly sliding open the door to the veranda, he went out. The morning
sun spilled a whitish light through the trees. In the corner of the yard near a
storehouse stood the cow, grateful for another day and for the grass growing at
her feet. Bidding the animal a silent farewell, Musashi went through the
windbreak and strode off on a path winding through the fields.
       Mount Koma today was visible from top to bottom. The clouds were
countless, small and cottony, each of a different shape, all playing freely in the
breeze.
       "Jōtarō's young, Otsū frail," he told himself. "But there're people who have
the goodness of heart to take care of the young and the frail. Some power in the

universe will decide whether I find them or not." His spirit, in turmoil since that
day at the waterfall, had seemed in danger of losing its way. Now it returned to
the path it was meant to follow. On a morning like this, thinking solely of Otsū
and Jōtarō seemed shortsighted, no matter how important they were to him. He
must keep his mind on the Way he had sworn to follow throughout this life and
into the next.
        Narai, which he reached a little after noon, was a thriving community. One
shop displayed a variety of pelts outside. Another specialized in Kiso combs.
        With the intention of asking his way, Musashi stuck his head into a shop
that sold medicine made from bear's gall. There was a sign reading "The Big
Bear," and by the entrance a large bear in a cage.
        The proprietor, his back turned, finished pouring himself a cup of tea and
said, "Can I help you?"
        "Could you tell me how to find the store belonging to a man named
Daizō?"
        "Daizō? He's down at the next crossroads." The man came out, holding his
cup of tea, and pointed down the road. Catching sight of his apprentice returning
from an errand, he called, "Here. This gentleman wants to go to Daizō's place.
He might not recognize it, so you'd better take him there."
        The apprentice, whose head was shaved so as to leave one shock of hair in
front and another in back but none on top, marched off with Musashi in tow. The
latter, grateful for the kindness, reflected that Daizō must enjoy the respect of his
fellow townsmen.
        "Over there," said the boy. He pointed at the establishment on the left and
immediately took his leave.
        Musashi, having expected a shop like the ones catering to travelers, was
surprised. The grilled display window was eighteen feet long, and behind the
shop there were two storehouses. The house, which was large and appeared to
extend quite a way back from the high wall enclosing the rest of the compound,
had an imposing entranceway, now closed.
        With a certain hesitancy, Musashi opened the door and called, "Good day!"
The large, dim interior reminded him of the inside of a sake brewery. Because of
the dirt floor, the air was pleasantly cool.
        A man stood in front of a bookkeeper's cabinet in the office, a room with a
raised floor covered with tatami.
        Shutting the door behind him, Musashi explained what he wanted. Before
he finished, the clerk nodded and said, "Well, well, so you've come for the boy."

He bowed and offered Musashi a cushion. "I'm sorry to say, you've just missed
him. He showed up around midnight, while we were preparing for the master's
trip. Seems the woman he was traveling with was kidnapped, and he wanted the
master to help find her. The master told him he'd be glad to try, but he couldn't
guarantee anything. If she'd been taken by a freebooter or bandit from around
here, there'd be no problem. Apparently, though, it was another traveler, and he'd
be sure to stay off the main roads.
       "This morning, the master sent people out to look, but they didn't find any
clues. The boy broke down when he heard that, so the master suggested he come
along with him. Then they could look for her on the way, or they might even run
into you. The boy seemed eager to go, and they left shortly after that. I guess it's
been about four hours now. What a shame you missed them!"
       Musashi was disappointed, though he wouldn't have been in time even if
he had started earlier and traveled faster. He consoled himself with the thought
that there was always tomorrow.
       "Where's Daizō going?" he asked.
       "It's hard to say. We don't run a shop in the ordinary sense. The herbs are
prepared in the mountains and brought here. Twice a year, spring and fall, the
salesmen stock up here and go out on the road. Since the master doesn't have
much to keep him busy, he often takes trips, sometimes to temples or shrines,
sometimes to hot-spring resorts, other times to places famous for their scenery.
This time I suspect he'll go to the Zenkōji, travel around Echigo awhile and then
go on to Edo. That's only a hunch, though. He never mentioned where he was
going.... Wouldn't you like some tea?"
       Musashi waited impatiently, ill at ease in such surroundings, while fresh
tea was fetched from the kitchen. When the tea arrived, he asked what Daizō
looked like.
       "Oh, if you see him, you'll recognize him right off. He's fifty-two years
old, quite robust—looks strong too—squarish, ruddy face with a few pockmarks.
There's a balding spot on his right temple."
      "How tall is he?"
      "About average, I'd say."
      "How does he dress?"
       "Now that you ask, I imagine that's the easiest way to recognize him. He's
wearing a striped Chinese cotton kimono he ordered from Sakai especially for
this trip. It's a very unusual fabric. I doubt anybody else is wearing it yet."
       Musashi formed an impression of the man's character, as well as his

appearance. Out of politeness, he lingered long enough to finish the tea. He
could not catch up with them before sundown, but he reckoned that if he traveled
during the night, he'd be at Shiojiri Pass by dawn and could wait for them there.
       By the time he came to the foot of the pass, the sun had disappeared, and
an evening mist was descending softly over the highroad. It was late spring;
lights in the houses along the road emphasized the loneliness of the mountains. It
was still five miles to the top of the pass. Musashi climbed on, not stopping to
relax until he reached Inojigahara, a high, level place hard by the pass. There he
lay down among the stars and allowed his mind to wander. It was not long before
he was sleeping soundly.


       The diminutive Sengen Shrine marked the pinnacle of the rocky eminence
that stood out like a carbuncle on the plateau. This was the highest point in the
Shiojiri area.
       Musashi's sleep was interrupted by the sound of voices. "Come up here,"
shouted one man. "You can see Mount Fuji." Musashi sat up and looked around
without seeing anyone.
       The morning light was dazzling. And there, floating on a sea of clouds,
was the red cone of Mount Fuji, still wearing its winter mantle of snow. The
sight brought a childish cry of delight to his lips. He had seen paintings of the
famous mountain and had a mental image of it, but this was the first time he had
actually seen it. It was nearly a hundred miles away but seemed to be on the
same level as he was.
       "Magnificent," he sighed, making no effort to wipe the tears from his
unblinking eyes.
       He felt awed by his own tininess, saddened by the thought of his
insignificance in the vastness of the universe. Since his victory at the spreading
pine, he had secretly dared to think there were few, if any, men as well qualified
as he was to be called great swordsmen. His own life on earth was short, limited;
the beauty and splendor of Mount Fuji eternal. Annoyed and a little depressed,
he asked himself how he could possibly attach any importance to his
accomplishments with the sword.
       There was an inevitability in the way nature rose majestically and sternly
above him; it was in the order of things that he was doomed to remain beneath it.
He fell on his knees before the mountain, hoping his presumptuousness would be
forgiven, and clasped his hands in prayer—for his mother's eternal rest and for

the safety of Otsū and Jōtarō. He expressed his thanks to his country and begged
to be allowed to become great, even if he could not share nature's greatness.
       But even as he knelt, different thoughts came rushing into his mind. What
had made him think man was small? Wasn't nature itself big only when it was
reflected in human eyes? Didn't the gods themselves come into existence only
when they communicated with the hearts of mortals? Men—living spirits, not
dead rock—performed the greatest actions of all.
       "As a man," he told himself, "I am not so distant from the gods and the
universe. I can touch them with the three-foot sword I carry. But not so long as I
feel there is a distinction between nature and humankind. Not so long as I remain
distant from the realm of the true expert, the fully developed man."
       His contemplation was interrupted by the chattering of some merchants
who had climbed up near where he was and were gazing at the peak.
       "They were right. You can see it."
       "But it's not often you can bow before the sacred mountain from here."


       Travelers moved in antlike streams in both directions, laden with a
kaleidoscopic array of luggage. Sooner or later Daizō and Jōtarō would come up
the hill. If by chance he failed to pick them out from among the other travelers,
surely they would see the sign he had left at the foot of the cliff: "To Daizō of
Narai. I wish to see you when you pass through. I shall wait at the shrine up
above. Musashi, Jōtarō's teacher."
       The sun was well above the horizon now. Musashi had been watching the
road like a hawk, but there was no sign of Daizō. On the other side of the pass,
the road divided into three. One went through Kōshū straight to Edo. Another,
the main route, crossed Usui Pass and entered Edo from the north. The third
veered off to the northern provinces. Whether Daizō was going north to the
Zenkōji or east to Edo, he would have to use this pass. Still, as Musashi realized,
people did not always move as one might expect. The wholesaler could have
gone somewhere well off the beaten path, or he could be spending an extra night
at the foot of the mountain. Musashi decided it might not be a bad idea to go
back there and ask about Daizō.
       As he started down the path cut into the cliffside, he heard a familiar
raucous voice say, "There he is, up there!" It brought to mind instantly the staff
that had grazed his body two nights before.
       "Come down from there!" Gonnosuke shouted. Staff in hand, he glared at

Musashi. "You ran away! You figured I'd challenge you and ducked out. Come
down, fight me one more time!"
       Musashi stopped between two rocks, leaned against one of them and stared
silently at Gonnosuke.
       Taking this to mean that he was not coming, Gonnosuke said to his mother,
"Wait here. I'll go up there and throw him down. Just watch."
       "Stop!" scolded his mother, who was astride the cow. "That's what's wrong
with you. You're impatient. You have to learn to read your enemy's thoughts
before you go flying into battle. Supposing he were to throw a big rock down on
you, then what?"
       Musashi could hear their voices, but the words were not clear. As far as he
was concerned, he'd already won; he already understood how Gonnosuke used
his staff. What he found upsetting was their bitterness and their desire for
revenge. If Gonnosuke lost again, they would be that much more resentful. From
his experience with the House of Yoshioka, he knew the folly of fighting bouts
that led to even greater hostility. And then there was the man's mother, in whom
Musashi saw a second Osugi, a woman who loved her son blindly and would
bear an eternal grudge against anyone who harmed him.
      He turned around and began climbing.
      "Wait!"
      Held back by the strength of the old woman's voice, Musashi stopped and
      turned around.
       She dismounted and walked to the foot of the cliff. When she was sure she
had his attention, she knelt, put both hands on the ground and bowed deeply.
       Musashi had done nothing to cause her to humble herself before him, but
he bowed back as best he could from the rocky path. His hand went out as
though to help her up.
       "Good samurai!" she cried. "I am ashamed to appear before you like this.
I'm sure you have nothing but scorn for my stubbornness. But I'm not acting out
of hate or spite or ill will. I ask you to take pity on my son. For ten years he's
practiced all by himself—no teachers, no friends, no truly worthy opponents. I
beg you to give him another lesson in the art of fighting."
       Musashi listened silently.
       "I would hate to see you part from us like this," she continued emotionally.
"My son's performance two days ago was shoddy. If he doesn't do something to
prove his ability, neither he nor I will be able to face our ancestors. Right now
he's nothing more than a farmer who lost a fight. Since he's had the good fortune

to meet a warrior of your stature, it would be a shame for him not to profit from
the experience. That's why I've brought him here. I implore you to heed my pleas
and accept his challenge."
       Her speech ended, she bowed again, almost as though she were worshiping
at Musashi's feet.
       Coming down the hill, he took her hand and helped her back up onto the
cow. "Gonnosuke," he said, "take the rope. Let's talk this over while we walk. I'll
consider whether I want to fight you or not."
       Musashi walked slightly ahead of them, and though he had suggested
discussing the question, said not a word. Gonnosuke kept his eyes suspiciously
on Musashi's back, now and again absently flicking a switch at the cow's legs.
His mother looked anxious and worried.
       When they had gone perhaps a mile, Musashi grunted and turned on his
heel. "I'll fight you," he said.
       Dropping the rope, Gonnosuke said, "Are you ready now?" He looked
around to check his position, as if ready to have it out right then and there.
       Ignoring him, Musashi addressed his mother. "Are you prepared for the
worst? There's not a whit's difference between a bout like this and a fight to the
death, even if the weapons are not the same."
       For the first time, the old woman laughed. "No need to tell me that. If he
loses to a younger man like you, then he may as well give up the martial arts,
and if he does that, there'd be no further point in living. If it turns out that way,
I'll bear you no grudge."
       "If that's the way you feel, all right." He picked up the rope Gonnosuke
had thrown down. "If we stay on the road, there'll be people in the way. Let's tie
the cow up, then I'll fight as long as you wish."
      There was a huge larch tree in the very middle of the flat area on which
      they stood. Pointing at it, Musashi led them there.
      "Make your preparations, Gonnosuke," he said calmly.
      Gonnosuke needed no urging. In a moment he was standing before Musashi
      with his staff pointed toward the ground.
      Musashi stood empty-handed, arms and shoulders relaxed.
      "Aren't you going to make any preparations?" asked Gonnosuke. "What
      for?"
      Gonnosuke's anger flared. "Get something to fight with. Anything you
      want."
      "I'm ready."

      "No weapon?"
      "I have my weapon here," Musashi replied, bringing his left hand up to his
      sword hilt.
      "You're fighting with a sword?"
       Musashi's only reply was a crooked little smile at the corner of his mouth.
They were already at the stage where he couldn't afford to waste breath talking.
       Underneath the larch tree sat Gonnosuke's mother, looking like a stone
Buddha. "Don't fight yet. Wait!" she said.
       Staring at each other, not making the slightest move, neither man seemed
to hear. Gonnosuke's staff was waiting under his arm for the opportunity to
strike, as if it had breathed in all the air on the plateau and was about to exhale it
in one great screeching blow. His hand glued to the underside of his sword hilt,
Musashi's eyes seemed to pierce Gonnosuke's body. Inwardly, the battle had
already begun, for the eye can damage a man more seriously than sword or staff.
After the opening slice is made with the eye, the sword or staff slips in
effortlessly.
      "Wait!" called the mother again.
      "What is it?" asked Musashi, jumping back four or five feet to a safe
      position.
      "You're fighting with a real sword?"
      "The way I fight, it doesn't make any difference whether I use a wooden
      sword or a real one."
      "I'm not trying to stop you."
       "I want to be sure you understand. The sword, wood or steel, is absolute.
In a real bout, there are no halfway measures. The only way to avoid risk is to
run away."
       "You're perfectly right, but it occurred to me that in a match this important,
you should announce yourself formally. Each of you is meeting an opponent the
likes of whom he will encounter only rarely. After the fight's over, it'll be too
late."
       "True."
       "Gonnosuke, give your name first."
       Gonnosuke bowed formally to Musashi. "Our distant ancestor is said to
have been Kakumyō, who fought under the banner of the great warrior of Kiso,
Minamoto no Yoshinaka. After Yoshinaka's death, Kakumyō became a follower
of the saint Hōnen, and it is possible that we are from the same family as he.
Over the centuries, our ancestors have lived in this area, but in my father's

generation we suffered dishonor, which I shall not name. In my distress, I went
with my mother to Ontake Shrine and vowed in writing that I would restore our
good name by following the Way of the Samurai. Before the god of Ontake
Shrine, I acquired my technique for using the staff. I call it the Musō Style, that
is, the Style of the Vision, for I received it in a revelation at the shrine. People
call me Musō Gonnosuke."
       Musashi returned his bow. "My family is descended from Hirata Shōgen,
whose house was a branch of the Akamatsus of Harima. I am the only son of
Shimmen Munisai, who lived in the village of Miyamoto in Mimasaka. I have
been given the name Miyamoto Musashi. I have no close relatives, and I have
dedicated my life to the Way of the Sword. If I should fall before your staff,
there is no need to trouble yourself about my remains."
       Retaking his stance, he cried, "On guard!"
       "On guard!"
       The old woman seemed scarcely to breathe. Far from having danger thrust
on herself and her son, she had gone out of her way to seek it out, deliberately
placing her son in front of Musashi's gleaming sword. Such a course would have
been unthinkable for an ordinary mother, but she was fully confident she had
done the right thing. She sat now in formal style, her shoulders leaning slightly
forward and her hands placed primly, one on top of the other, on her knees. Her
body gave the impression of being small and shrunken; it would have been hard
to believe that she had borne several children, buried all but one of them, and
persevered through innumerable hardships to make a warrior out of the lone
survivor.
       Her eyes emitted a flash of light, as though all the gods and bodhisattvas of
the cosmos had gathered in her person to witness the battle.
       In the instant when Musashi unsheathed, Gonnosuke felt a chill go through
his body. He sensed instinctively that his fate, exposed to Musashi's sword, had
already been decided, for at this moment he saw before him a man he had not
seen before. Two days earlier, he had observed Musashi in a fluid, flexible
mood, one that might be likened to smooth, flowing lines of calligraphy in the
cursive style.
       He was unprepared for the man who faced him now, a study in austerity,
like a square, immaculately written character with every line and dot in place.
       Realizing that he had misjudged his adversary, he found himself unable to
swing into a violent attack, as he had done before. His staff remained poised but
powerless above his head.

       While the two men confronted each other silently, the last of the morning
mist cleared away. A bird flew indolently between them and the hazy mountains
in the distance. Then all at once a shriek split the air, as though the bird had
plummeted to earth. It was impossible to tell whether the sound came from the
sword or the staff. It was unreal—the clapping of one hand that followers of Zen
talk about.
       Simultaneously, the two fighters' bodies, moving in perfect coordination
with their weapons, shifted positions. The change took less time than it takes for
an image to be transmitted from the eye to the brain. Gonnosuke's strike had
missed. Musashi had defensively reversed his forearm and swept upward, from
near Gonnosuke's side to a point above his head, narrowly missing his right
shoulder and temple. Musashi then employed his masterful return strike, the one
that had previously brought all opponents to grief, but Gonnosuke, seizing his
staff near the ends with both hands, blocked the sword above his own head.
       Had the sword not met the wood obliquely, Gonnosuke's weapon would
doubtless have been split in two. In shifting, he had thrust his left elbow forward
and lifted his right elbow, with the intent of striking Musashi in the solar plexus,
but at what should have been the moment of impact, the end of the staff was still
a fraction of an inch from Musashi's body.
       With sword and staff crossed above Gonnosuke's head, neither could
advance or retreat. Both knew that a false move meant sudden death. Though the
position was analogous to a sword-guard-to-sword-guard impasse, Musashi was
aware of the important differences between sword and staff. A staff ostensibly
had no guard, no blade, no hilt, no point. But in the hands of an expert like
Gonnosuke, any part of the four-foot weapon could be blade, point or hilt. Thus
the staff was far more versatile than the sword and could even be used as a short
lance.
       Unable to predict Gonnosuke's reaction, Musashi could not withdraw his
weapon. Gonnosuke, on the other hand, was in an even more perilous position:
his weapon was playing the passive role of blocking Musashi's blade. If he
allowed his spirit to waver for so much as an instant, the sword would split open
his head.
       Gonnosuke's face paled, he bit his lower lip, and oily sweat glistened
around the upturned corners of his eyes. As the crossed weapons began to waver,
his breathing became heavier.
       "Gonnosuke!" cried his mother, her face more pallid than her son's. She
raised her torso and slapped her hip. "Your hip's too high!" she shouted, then fell

forward. Her senses seemed to have left her; her voice had sounded as though
she were spitting blood.
       It had appeared that sword and staff would remain locked until the fighters
turned to stone. At the sound of the old woman's cry, they came apart with a
force more frightening than that of their coming together.
       Musashi, slamming his heels into the ground, leaped backward a full seven
feet. The interval was spanned in a flash by Gonnosuke and the length of his
staff. Musashi barely managed to jump aside.
       Thwarted in this do-or-die attack, Gonnosuke stumbled forward off
balance, exposing his back. Musashi moved with the speed of a peregrine falcon,
and a thin flash of light connected with the dorsal muscles of his adversary, who,
with the bleat of a terrified calf, stumbled, and fell face down on the ground.
Musashi sat down with a thud on the grass, holding his hand to his stomach.
       "I give up!" he shouted.
       No sound came from Gonnosuke. His mother, too stunned to speak, stared
blankly at his prostrate form.
       "I used the ridge of the sword," said Musashi, turning to her. Since she did
not seem to comprehend, he said, "Get him some water. He's not badly hurt."
       "What?" she cried in disbelief. Seeing there was no blood on her son's
body, she staggered to his side and threw her arms around him. She called his
name, brought him water, then shook him until he came to his senses.
       Gonnosuke gazed vacantly at Musashi for a few minutes, then walked over
to him and bowed his forehead to the ground. "I'm sorry," he said simply. "You're
too good for me."
       Musashi, seemingly awakening from a trance, grasped his hand and said,
"Why do you say that? You didn't lose; I did." He opened the front of his
kimono. "Look at this." He pointed to a red spot where the staff had struck him.
"Only a little more and I'd have been killed." There was a tremor of shock in his
voice, for the truth was he had not yet figured out when or how he had suffered
the wound.
       Gonnosuke and his mother stared at the red mark but said nothing.
       Pulling his kimono together, Musashi asked the old woman why she had
cautioned her son about his hips. Had she observed something faulty or
dangerous in his stance?
       "Well, I'm no expert in these matters, but as I watched him using all his
strength to hold your sword off, it seemed to me he was missing an opportunity.
He couldn't advance, couldn't retreat, and he was too excited. But I saw that if he

simply dropped his hips, holding his hands the way they were, the end of the
staff would naturally strike your chest. It all happened in an instant. At the time,
I wasn't really conscious of what I said."
       Musashi nodded, regarding himself fortunate to have received a useful
lesson without having had to pay with his life. Gonnosuke, too, listened
reverently; no doubt he had also gained a new insight. What he had just
experienced was no ephemeral revelation but a journey to the boundary between
life and death. His mother, perceiving him to be on the brink of disaster, had
taught him a lesson in survival.
       Years later, after Gonnosuke had established his own style and become
known far and wide, he recorded the technique his mother had discovered on this
occasion. Though he wrote at some length of his mother's devotion and of his
match with Musashi, he refrained from saying that he had won. On the contrary,
for the rest of his life he told people that he had lost, and that the defeat had been
an invaluable lesson to him.
       Musashi, having wished mother and son well, proceeded on from
Inojigahara to Kamisuwa, unaware that he was being followed by a samurai who
inquired of all the grooms at the horse stations, as well as of other travelers,
whether they had seen Musashi on the road.
