Shavings


        Like most people thrown together by circumstance, who ordinarily have
little or nothing in common, the samurai and his host soon found mutual ground.
The supply of sake was plentiful, the fish fresh, and Osugi and Kojirō had an
odd spiritual kinship that kept the atmosphere from getting stickily formal. It
was with genuine concern that she inquired about his career as a shugyōsha and
he about her progress in achieving her "great ambition."
        When she told him she'd had no word of Musashi's whereabouts for a long
time, Kojirō offered a ray of hope. "I heard a rumor that he visited two or three
prominent warriors last fall and winter. I have a hunch he's still in Edo."
        Yajibei wasn't so sure, of course, and told Kojirō that his men had learned
absolutely nothing. After they had discussed Osugi's predicament from every
angle, Yajibei said, "I hope we can count on your continued friendship."
        Kojirō responded in the same vein and made rather a display of rinsing out
his cup and offering it not only to Yajibei but to his two minions, for each of
whom he poured a drink.
        Osugi was positively exhilarated. "They say," she observed gravely, "that
good is to be found wherever one looks. Even so, I'm exceptionally lucky! To
think that I have two strong men like you on my side! I'm sure the great Kanzeon
is looking after me." She made no attempt to conceal her sniffling or the tears
that came to her eyes.
        Not wanting the conversation to get maudlin, Yajibei said, "Tell me,
Kojirō, who were the four men you cut down back there?"
        This seemed to be the opportunity Kojirō had been waiting for, for his
agile tongue set to work without delay. "Oh, them!" he began with a nonchalant
laugh. "Just some rōnin from Obata's school. I went there five or six times to
discuss military matters with Obata, and those fellows kept butting in with
impertinent remarks. They even had the nerve to spout off on the subject of
swordsmanship, so I told them that if they'd come to the banks of the Sumida, I'd
give them a lesson in the secrets of the Ganryū Style, along with a demonstration
of the Drying Pole's cutting edge. I let them know I didn't care how many of
them came.
        "When I got there, there were five of them, but the minute I took a stance,

one turned tail and ran. I must say, Edo has no shortage of men who talk better
than they fight." He laughed again, this time boisterously.
       "Obata?"
       "You don't know him? Obata Kagenori. He comes from the lineage of
Obata Nichijō, who served the Takeda family of Kai. Ieyasu took him on, and
now he's a lecturer in military science to the shōgun, Hidetada. He also has his
own school."
       "Oh, yes, I remember now." Yajibei was surprised and impressed by
Kojirō's apparent familiarity with such a celebrated person. "The young man still
has his forelock," he marveled to himself, "but he must be somebody if he
associates with samurai of that rank." The carpenter boss was, after all, a simple
soul, and the quality he most admired in his fellow man was clearly brute
strength. His admiration for Kojirō intensified.
       Leaning toward the samurai, he said, "Let me make you a proposition. I've
always got forty or fifty young louts lying around my house. How would it be if
I built a dōjō for you and asked you to train them?"
       "Well, I wouldn't mind giving them lessons, but you must understand that
so many daimyō are tugging at my sleeve with offers—two, three thousand
bushels—that I don't know what to do. Frankly, I wouldn't seriously consider
going into anyone's service for less than five thousand. Also, I'm rather
obligated, just for the sake of courtesy, to stay where I'm living now. Still, I've no
objection to coming to your place."
       With a low bow, Yajibei said, "I'd greatly appreciate that."
       Osugi chimed in, "We'll be expecting you."
       Jūrō and Koroku, far too naive to recognize the condescension and self-
serving propaganda lacing Kojirō's speech, were bowled over by the great man's
largesse.
       When the boat rounded the turn into the Kyōbashi moat, Kojirō said, "I'll
be getting off here." He then leapt onto the bank and in a matter of seconds was
lost in the dust hovering over the street.
       "Very impressive young man," said Yajibei, still under the spell.
       "Yes," Osugi agreed with conviction. "He's a real warrior. I'm sure plenty
of daimyō would pay him a handsome stipend." After a moment's pause, she
added wistfully, "If only Matahachi were like that."


      About five days later, Kojirō breezed into Yajibei's establishment and was

ushered into the guest room. There, the forty or fifty henchmen on hand paid
their respects, one by one. Kojirō, delighted, remarked to Yajibei that he seemed
to lead a very interesting life.
       Pursuing his earlier idea, Yajibei said, "As I told you, I'd like to build a
dōjō. Would you care to take a look at the property?"
       The field in back of the house measured nearly two acres. Freshly dyed
cloth hung in one corner, but Yajibei assured Kojirō the dyer he had rented the
plot to could easily be evicted.
       "You don't really need a dōjō," observed Kojirō. "The area's not open to
the street; no one's likely to intrude."
       "Whatever you say, but what about rainy days?"
       "I won't come if the weather's bad. I should warn you, though: the practice
sessions will be rougher than the ones held by the Yagyū or other schools around
town. If your men aren't careful, they might wind up crippled, or worse. You'd
better make that clear to them."
       "There'll be no misunderstanding about that. Feel free to conduct classes as
you see fit."
       They agreed on having lessons three times a month, on the third, the
thirteenth and the twenty-third, weather permitting.
       Kojirō's appearances in Bakurōchō were a source of endless gossip. One
neighbor was heard to say, "Now they've got a show-off over there worse than
all the others put together." His boyish forelock also came in for considerable
comment, the general opinion being that since he must be in his early twenties, it
was high time he conformed to the samurai practice of shaving his pate. But only
those inside the Hangawara household were treated to the sight of Kojirō's
brightly embroidered underrobe, which they got to see every time he bared his
shoulder to give his arm free play.
       Kojirō's demeanor was quite what might be expected. Though this was
practice and many of his students were inexperienced, he gave no quarter. By the
third session, the casualties already included one man permanently deformed,
plus four or five suffering from lesser injuries. The wounded were not far off;
their moans could be heard coming from the back of the house.
       "Next!" shouted Kojirō, brandishing a long sword made of loquat wood.
At the beginning he had told them that a blow struck with a loquat sword "will
rot your flesh to the bone."
       "Ready to quit? If you're not, come forward. If you are, I'm going home,"
he taunted contemptuously.

       Out of pure chagrin, one man said, "All right, I'll give it a try." He
disengaged himself from the group, walked toward Kojirō, then leaned over to
pick up a wooden sword. With a sharp crack, Kojirō flattened him.
       "That," he declared, "is a lesson in why not to leave yourself open. It's the
worst thing you can do." With obvious self-satisfaction, he looked around at the
faces of the others, thirty to forty in number, most of them all but visibly
trembling.
      The latest victim was carried to the well, where water was poured over him.
      He did not come to.
      "Poor guy's done for."
      "You mean ... he's dead?"
      "He's not breathing."
      Others ran up to stare at their slain comrade. Some were angry, some
      resigned, but Kojirō didn't give the corpse a second glance.
       "If something like this frightens you," he said menacingly, "you'd better
forget about the sword. When I think that any one of you would be itching to
fight if somebody on the street called you a thug or a braggart ..." He didn't
finish the sentence, but as he walked across the field in his leather socks, he
continued his lecture. "Give the matter some thought, my fine hoodlums. You're
ready to draw the minute a stranger steps on your toes or brushes against your
scabbard, but you're tied up in knots when the time comes for a real bout. You'll
throw your lives away cheerfully over a woman or your own petty pride, but you
haven't the guts to sacrifice yourself in a worthy cause. You're emotional, you're
moved only by vanity. That's not enough, nowhere near enough."
       Throwing his chest out, he concluded, "The truth is simple. The only real
bravery, the only genuine self-confidence, comes from training and self-
discipline. I dare any one of you: stand up and fight me like a man."
       One student, hoping to make him eat his words, attacked from behind.
Kojirō bent double, almost touching the ground, and the assailant flew over his
head and landed in front of him. The next instant, there was the loud crack of
Kojirō's loquat sword against the man's hipbone.
       "That'll be all for today," he said, tossing the sword aside and going to the
well to wash his hands. The corpse was lying in a flaccid heap beside the sink.
Kojirō dipped his hands in the water and splashed some on his face without a
word of sympathy.
       Slipping his arm back into his sleeve, he said, "I hear a lot of people go to
this place called Yoshiwara. You men must know the district pretty well.

Wouldn't you like to show me around?" Bluntly announcing that he wanted to
have a good time or go drinking was a habit of Kojirō's, but it was a matter of
conjecture whether he was being deliberately impudent or disarmingly candid.
       Yajibei chose the more charitable interpretation. "Haven't you been to
Yoshiwara yet?" he asked with surprise. "We'll have to do something about that.
I'd go with you myself, but, well, I have to be here this evening for the wake and
so on."
       He singled out Jūrō and Koroku and gave them some money. Also a
warning. "Remember, you two—I'm not sending you out to play around. You're
only going along to take care of your teacher and see that he has a good time."


      Kojirō, a few steps in front of the other two, soon found he had trouble
staying on the road, for at night most of Edo was pitch black, to an extent
unimaginable in cities like Kyoto, Nara and Osaka.
      "This road's terrible," he said. "We should have brought a lantern."
      "People'd laugh if you went around the licensed quarter carrying a
lantern," said Jūrō. "Watch out, sir. That pile of dirt you're on came out of the
new moat. You'd better come down before you fall in."
      Presently the water in the moat took on a reddish cast, as did the sky
beyond the Sumida River. A late spring moon hung like a flat white cake above
the roofs of Yoshiwara.
      "That's it over there, across the bridge," said Jūrō. "Shall I lend you a hand
towel?"
      "What for?"
      "To hide your face a little—like this." Jūrō and Koroku both drew red
cloths from their obi and tied them kerchief-fashion over their heads. Kojirō
followed suit, using a piece of russet silk crepe.
      "That's the way," said Jūrō. "Stylish like."
      "Looks very good on you."
      Kojirō and his guides fell in with the bandannaed throng sauntering from
house to house. Like Yanagimachi in Kyoto, Yoshiwara was brightly lit. The
entrances to the houses were gaily decorated with curtains of red or pale yellow;
some had bells at the bottom to let the girls know when customers entered.
      After they had been in and out of two or three houses, Jūrō said leeringly
to Kojirō, "There's no use trying to hide it, sir."
      "Hide what?"

       "You said you'd never been here before, but a girl in the last house
recognized you. The minute we went in, she gave a little cry and hid behind a
screen. Your secret's out, sir."
       "I've never been here before. Who're you talking about?"
       "Don't play innocent, sir. Let's go back. I'll show you."
       They reentered the house, whose curtain bore a crest shaped like a bitter
buckbean leaf, split in three. "Sumiya" was written in rather small characters to
the left.
       The house's heavy beams and stately corridors were reminiscent of Kyoto
temple architecture, but the garish newness nullified the attempt to create an aura
of tradition and dignity. Kojirō strongly suspected that swamp plants still thrived
beneath the floor.
       The large parlor they were shown to upstairs had not been straightened up
after the last customers. Both table and floor were strewn with bits of food,
tissue paper, toothpicks and whatnot. The maid who came to clean up performed
her chore with all the finesse of a day laborer.
       When Onao arrived to take their orders, she made a point of letting them
know how busy she was. She claimed that she hardly had time to sleep and
another three years of this hectic pace would put her in her grave. The better
houses of Kyoto contrived to maintain the fiction that their raison d'être was to
entertain and please their customers. Here the aim was obviously to relieve men
of their money as quickly as possible.
       "So this is Edo's pleasure quarter," sniffed Kojirō, with a critical glance at
the knotholes in the ceiling. "Pretty shoddy, I'd say."
       "Oh, this is only temporary," Onao protested. "The building we're putting
up now will be finer than anything you'd see in Kyoto or Fushimi." She stared at
Kojirō a moment. "You know, sir, I've seen you somewhere before. Ah, yes! It
was last year on the Kōshū highroad."
       Kojirō had forgotten the chance meeting, but reminded of it, he said with a
spark of interest, "Why, yes; I guess our fates must be entwined."
       "I should say they are," Jūrō said, laughing, "if there's a girl here who
remembers you." While teasing Kojirō about his past, he described the girl's face
and clothing and asked Onao to go find her.
       "I know the one you mean," said Onao, and went to fetch her.
       When some time had passed and she still hadn't come back, Jūrō and
Koroku went out in the hall and clapped their hands to summon her. They had to
clap several more times before she finally reappeared.

       "She's not here, the one you asked for," said Onao.
       "She was here only a few minutes ago."
       "It's strange, just as I was saying to the master. We were at Kobotoke Pass
and that samurai you're with came walking along the road, and she went off by
herself that time too."
       Behind the Sumiya stood the frame of the new building, roof partly
finished, no walls.
       "Hanagiri! Hanagiri!"
       This was the name they had given Akemi, who was hiding between a stack
of lumber and a small mountain of shavings. Several times the searchers had
passed so close she had had to hold her breath.
       "How disgusting!" she thought. For the first few minutes her wrath had
been directed at Kojirō alone. By now it had expanded to embrace every member
of the masculine sex—Kojirō, Seijūrō, the samurai at Hachiōji, the customers
who manhandled her nightly at the Sumiya. All men were her enemies, all
abominable.
       Except one. The right one. The one who would be like Musashi. The one
she had sought incessantly. Having given up on the real Musashi, she had now
persuaded herself that it would be comforting to pretend to be in love with
someone similar to him. Much to her chagrin, she found no one remotely like
him.
       "Ha-na-gi-ri!" It was Shōji Jinnai himself, first shouting from the back of
the house, now drawing closer to her hiding place.
       He was accompanied by Kojirō and the other two men. They had
complained at tiresome length, making Jinnai repeat his apologies over and over,
but finally they went off toward the street.
      Akemi, seeing them go, breathed a sigh of relief and waited until Jinnai
      went back inside, then ran straight to the kitchen door.
      "Why, Hanagiri, were you out there all the time?" the kitchen maid asked
      hysterically.
      "Shh! Be quiet, and give me some sake."
      "Sake? Now?"
      "Yes, sake!" Since coming to Edo, the times when Akemi had sought solace
      in sake had become more and more frequent.
       The frightened maid poured her a large cupful. Shutting her eyes, Akemi
drained the vessel dry, her powdered face tilted back until it was almost parallel
with the white bottom of the cup.

       As she turned away from the door, the maid cried in alarm, "Where're you
       off to now?"
       "Shut up. I'll just wash my feet, then go back inside."
       Taking her at her word, the maid shut the door and returned to her work.
        Akemi slipped her feet into the first pair of zōri she saw and walked
somewhat unsteadily to the street. "How good to be out in the open!" was her
first reaction, but this was followed very closely by revulsion. She spat in the
general direction of the pleasure-seekers strolling along the brightly lit road and
took to her heels.
        Coming to a place where stars were reflected in a moat, she stopped to
look. She heard running feet behind her. "Oh, oh! Lanterns this time. And they're
from the Sumiya. Animals! Can't they eyen let a girl have a few minutes' peace?
No. Find her! Put her back to making money! Turning flesh and blood into a
little lumber for their new house—that's the only thing that'll satisfy them. Well,
they won't get me back!"
        The curled wood shavings hanging loosely in her hair bobbed up and down
as she ran as fast as her legs would carry her into the darkness. She had no idea
where she was going, and couldn't have cared less, so long as it was away, far
away.
