Mountain Devils


        "Let me make myself clear. I don't want you to go to any trouble on my
account. Your hospitality, which I appreciate greatly, is quite sufficient."
      "Yes, sir. That's very considerate of you, sir," replied the priest.
      "I'd just like to relax. That's all."
      "By all means."
        "Now I hope you'll forgive my rudeness," said the samurai, stretching out
casually on his side and propping his graying head on his forearm.
        The guest who'd just arrived at the Tokuganji was Nagaoka Sado, a high-
ranking vassal of Lord Hosokawa Tadaoki of Buzen. He had little time for
personal matters, but he invariably came on such occasions as the anniversary of
his father's death, usually staying overnight, since the temple was some twenty
miles from Edo. For a man of his rank, he traveled unostentatiously,
accompanied this time by only two samurai and one young personal attendant.
        To get away from the Hosokawa establishment even for a short time, he
had had to trump up an excuse. He rarely had the chance to do as he pleased, and
now that he did, he was fully enjoying the local sake while listening to the
croaking of frogs. Briefly he could forget about everything—the problems of
administration and the constant need to be attuned to the nuances of daily
affairs.
        After dinner, the priest quickly cleared the dishes and left. Sado was
chatting idly with his attendants, who were seated next to the wall, only their
faces showing in the light of the lamp.
        "I could just lie here forever and enter Nirvana, like the Buddha," Sado
said lazily.
        "Careful you don't catch cold. The night air is damp."
        "Oh, leave me alone. This body's survived a few battles. It can hold its
own against a sneeze or two. But just smell those ripe blossoms! Nice fragrance,
isn't it?"
        "I don't smell anything."
        "Don't you? If your sense of smell is that poor ... you sure you don't have a
cold yourself?"
        They were engrossed in this kind of seemingly light banter when suddenly

the frogs fell silent, and a loud voice shouted, "You devil! What're you doing
here, staring into the guest room?"
      Sado's bodyguards were on their feet instantly.
      "What is it?"
      "Who's out there?"
      As their cautious eyes scanned the garden, the clatter of small feet receded
      in the direction of the kitchen.
       A priest looked in from the veranda, bowed and said, "Sorry for the
disturbance. It's only one of the local children. There's nothing to worry about."
"Are you sure?"
       "Yes, of course. He lives a couple of miles from here. His father worked as
a groom, until he died recently, but his grandfather is said to have been a
samurai, and every time he sees one, he stops and stares—with his finger in his
mouth."
       Sado sat up. "You mustn't be too hard on him. If he wants to be a samurai,
bring him in. We'll have some sweets and talk it over."
       By now Iori had reached the kitchen. "Hey, Granny," he shouted. "I've run
out of millet. Fill this up for me, will you?" The sack he thrust out to the
wrinkled old woman who worked in the kitchen would have held half a bushel.
       She shouted right back. "Watch your tongue, you beggar! You talk as if we
owe you something."
       "You've got a lot of nerve to begin with!" said a priest who was washing
dishes. "The head priest took pity on you, so we're giving you food, but don't be
insolent. When you're asking a favor, do it politely."
       "I'm not begging. I gave the priest the pouch my father left me. There's
money in it, plenty of money."
       "And how much could a groom living out in the sticks leave his son?"
"Are you going to give me the millet? Yes or no?"
       "There you go again. Just look at yourself. You're crazy, taking orders from
that fool rōnin. Where did he come from anyway? Who is he? Why should he be
eating your food?"
       "None of your business."
       "Hmph. Digging around in that barren plain where there's never going to
be a field or a garden or anything else! The whole village is laughing at you."
       "Who asked for your advice?"
       "Whatever's wrong with that rōnin's head must be catching. What do you
expect to find up there—a pot of gold, like in a fairy tale? You're not even dry

behind the ears, and you're already digging your own grave."
       "Shut up and give me the millet. The millet! Now."
       The priest was still teasing Iori a couple of minutes later when something
cold and slimy hit his face. His eyes popped, then he saw what it was—a warty
toad. He screamed and lunged for Iori, but just as he collared him, another priest
arrived to announce that the boy was wanted in the samurai's room.
       The head priest had also heard the commotion and rushed to the kitchen.
"Did he do something to upset our guest?" he asked worriedly.
      "No. Sado just said he'd like to talk to him. He'd like to give him some
      sweets too."
      The head priest hurriedly took Iori by the hand and delivered him
      personally to Sado's room.
      As Iori timidly sat down beside the priest, Sado asked, "How old are you?"
      "Thirteen."
      "And you want to become a samurai?"
      "That's right," replied Iori, nodding vigorously.
       "Well, well. Why don't you come and live with me, then? You'd have to
help with the housework at the beginning, but later I'd make you one of the
apprentice samurai."
      Iori shook his head silently. Sado, taking this for bashfulness, assured him
      that the offer was serious.
      Iori, flashing an angry look, said, "I heard you wanted to give me some
      sweets. Where are they?"
      Paling, the head priest slapped him on the wrist.
       "Don't scold him," Sado said reprovingly. He liked children and tended to
indulge them. "He's right. A man should keep his word. Have the sweets brought
in."
       When they arrived, Iori began stuffing them into his kimono.
       Sado, a little taken aback, asked, "Aren't you going to eat them here?" "No.
My teacher's waiting for me at home."
       "Oh? You have a teacher?"
       Without bothering to explain himself, Iori bolted from the room and
disappeared through the garden.
       Sado thought his behavior highly amusing. Not so the head priest, who
bowed to the floor two or three times before going to the kitchen in pursuit of
Iori.
       "Where is that insolent brat?"

       "He picked up his sack of millet and left."
       They listened for a moment but heard only a discordant screeching. Iori
had plucked a leaf from a tree and was trying to improvise a tune. None of the
few songs he knew seemed to work. The grooms' chantey was too slow, the Bon
festival songs too complicated. Finally, he settled on a melody resembling the
sacred dance music at the local shrine. This suited him well enough, for he liked
the dances, which his father had sometimes taken him to see.
       About halfway to Hōtengahara, at a point where two streams joined to
make a river, he gave a sudden start. The leaf flew from his mouth, along with a
spray of saliva, and he leapt into the bamboo beside the road.
       Standing on a crude bridge were three or four men, engaged in a furtive
conversation. "It's them," Iori exclaimed softly.
       A remembered threat rang in his frightened ears. When mothers in this
region scolded their children, they were apt to say, "If you're not good, the
mountain devils will come down and get you." The last time they had actually
come had been in the fall of the year before last.
       Twenty miles or so from here, in the mountains of Hitachi, there was a
shrine dedicated to a mountain deity. Centuries earlier, the people had so feared
this god that the villages had taken turns making annual offerings of grain and
women to him. When a community's turn came, the inhabitants had assembled
their tribute and gone in a torchlight procession to the shrine. As time went on
and it became evident that the god was really only a man, they became lax in
making their offerings.
       During the period of the civil wars, the so-called mountain god had taken
to having his tribute collected by force. Every two or three years, a pack of
brigands, armed with halberds, hunting spears, axes—anything to strike terror
into the hearts of peaceful citizens—would descend on first one community, then
the next, carrying away everything that caught their fancy, including wives and
daughters. If their victims put up any resistance, the plundering was
accompanied by slaughter.
       Their last raid still vivid in his memory, Iori cringed in the underbrush. A
group of five shadows came running across the field to the bridge. Then, through
the night mist, another small band, and still another, until the bandits numbered
between forty and fifty.
       Iori held his breath and stared while they debated a course of action. They
soon reached a decision. Their leader issued a command and pointed toward the
village. The men rushed off like a swarm of locusts.

        Before long, the mist was rent by a great cacophony—birds, cattle, horses,
the wailing of people young and old.
        Iori quickly made up his mind to get help from the samurai at the
Tokuganji, but the minute he left the shelter of the bamboo, a shout came from
the bridge: "Who's there?" He had not seen the two men left behind to stand
guard. Swallowing hard, he ran for all he was worth, but his short legs were no
match for those of grown men.
        "Where do you think you're going?" shouted the man who got hold of him
first.
        "Who are you?"
        Instead of crying like a baby, which might have thrown the men off guard,
Iori scratched and fought against the brawny arms imprisoning him.
       "He saw all of us together. He was going to tell somebody."
       "Let's beat him up and dump him in a rice field."
       "I've got a better idea."
       They carried Iori to the river, threw him down the bank and jumping down
       after him, tied him to one of the bridge posts.
       "There, that takes care of him." The two ruffians climbed back up to their
       station on the bridge.
        The temple bell tolled in the distance. Iori watched horrified as the flames
rising from the village dyed the river a bloody red. The sound of babies crying
and women wailing came closer and closer. Then wheels rumbled onto the
bridge. Half a dozen of the bandits were leading oxcarts and horses loaded with
loot.
        "Filthy scum!" screamed a masculine voice.
        "Give me back my wife!"
        The scuffle on the bridge was brief but fierce. Men shouted, metal clanged,
a shriek went up, and a bloody corpse landed at Iori's feet. A second body
splashed into the river, spraying his face with blood and water. One by one
farmers fell from the bridge, six of them in all. The bodies rose to the surface
and floated slowly downstream, but one man, not quite dead, grasped at the
reeds and clawed the earth until he had pulled himself halfway out of the water.
        "You!" cried Iori. "Untie this rope. I'll go for help. I'll see that you get your
revenge." Then his voice rose to a bellow. "Come on. Untie me. I've got to save
the village."
       The man lay motionless.
       Straining at his bonds with all his might, Iori finally loosened them enough

     to squirm down and kick the man in the shoulder.
     The face that turned toward his was blotched with mud and gore, the eyes
     dull and uncomprehending.
       The man crawled painfully closer; with his last ounce of strength, he undid
the knots. As the rope fell loose, he collapsed and died.
       Iori looked cautiously up at the bridge and bit his lip. There were more
bodies up there. But luck was with him. A cartwheel had broken through a rotten
plank. The thieves, hurrying to pull it out, didn't notice his escape.
       Realizing he couldn't make it to the temple, Iori tiptoed along in the
shadows until he reached a place shallow enough to cross. When he gained the
other bank, he was on the edge of Hōtengahara. He covered the remaining mile
to the cabin as though lightning was nipping at his heels.
       As he neared the knoll where the cabin stood, he saw that Musashi was
standing outside, looking at the sky. "Come quick!" he shouted.
     "What happened?"
     "We have to go to the village."
     "Is that where the fire is?"
     "Yes. The mountain devils have come again."
     "Devils? ... Bandits?"
       "Yes, at least forty of them. Please hurry. We have to rescue the villagers."
Musashi ducked into the cabin and emerged with his swords. While he was tying
his sandals, Iori said, "Follow me. I'll show you the way."
     "No. You stay here."
     Iori couldn't believe his ears.
     "It's too dangerous."
     "I'm not scared."
     "You'd be in the way."
     "You don't even know the shortest way there!"
     "The fire's all the guide I need. Now just be a good boy and stay right here."
       "Yes, sir." Iori nodded obediently, but with deep misgivings. He turned his
head toward the village and watched somberly as Musashi streaked off in the
direction of the red glow.


     The bandits had tied their female captives, moaning and screaming, in a
     row and were pulling them mercilessly toward the bridge.
     "Stop your squawking!" shouted one bandit.

       "You act like you don't know how to walk. Move!"
        When the women held back, the ruffians lashed them with whips. One
woman fell, dragging down others. Seizing the rope and forcing them back on
their feet, one man snarled, "Stubborn bitches! What have you got to groan
about? Stay here and you work like slaves the rest of your lives, all for a bit of
millet. Look at you, nothing but skin and bones! You'll be a lot better off having
fun with us."
        Picking one of the healthier-looking animals, which were all heavily
loaded with booty, they tied the rope to it and gave it a sharp slap on the rump.
The slack in the rope was snapped up suddenly and fresh shrieks rent the air as
the women were yanked forward again. Those who fell were dragged along, with
their faces scraping the ground.
       "Stop!" screamed one. "My arms're coming off!"
       A wave of raucous laughter swept through the brigands.
       At that moment, horse and women came to a dead halt.
       "What's going on? ... Somebody's up ahead!"
       All eyes strained to see.
       "Who's there?" roared one bandit.
        The silent shadow walking toward them carried a white blade. The bandits,
trained to be sensitive to odors, instantly recognized the on€ they smelled now—
blood, dripping from the sword.
        As the men in front fell back clumsily, Musashi sized up the enemy force.
He counted twelve men, all hard-muscled and brutish-looking. Recovering from
the initial shock, they readied their weapons and took defensive stances. One ran
forward with an ax. Another, carrying a hunter's spear, approached diagonally,
keeping his body low and aiming at Musashi's ribs. The man with the ax was the
first to go.
        "A-w-w-k!" Sounding as though he'd bitten his own tongue off, he weaved
crazily and collapsed in a heap.
        "Don't you know me?" Musashi's voice rang out sharply. "I am the
protector of the people, a messenger from the god who watches over this
village." In the same breath, he seized the spear pointed at him, wrested it from
its owner's hands and threw it violently to the ground.
        Moving swiftly into the band of ruffians, he was kept busy countering
thrusts from all sides. But after the first surge, made while they still fought with
confidence, he had a good idea of what lay ahead. It was a matter not of numbers
but of the opposition's cohesiveness and self-control.

       Seeing one man after another turned into a blood-spurting missile, the
bandits were soon falling back to ever greater distances, until finally they
panicked and lost all semblance of organization.
       Musashi was learning even as he fought, acquiring experience that would
lead him to specific methods to be used by a smaller force against a larger one.
This was a valuable lesson and couldn't be learned in a fight with a single enemy.
       His two swords were in their scabbards. For years, he'd practiced to master
the art of seizing his opponent's weapon and turning it against him. Now he'd put
study into practice, taking the sword away from the first man he'd encountered.
His reason wasn't that his own sword, which he thought of as his soul, was too
pure to be sullied by the blood of common brigands. He was being practical;
against such a motley array of weapons, a blade might get chipped, or even
broken.
       When the five or six survivors fled toward the village, Musashi took a
minute or two to relax and catch his breath, fully expecting them to return with
reinforcements. Then he freed the women and ordered those who could stand to
take care of the others.
      After some words of comfort and encouragement, he told them it was up to
      them to save their parents and children and husbands.
      "You'd be miserable if you survived and they perished, wouldn't you?" he
      asked.
      There was a murmur of agreement.
       "You yourselves have the strength to protect yourselves and save the
others. But you don't know how to use that strength. That's why you're at the
mercy of outlaws. We're going to change that. I'm going to help you by showing
you how to use the power you have. The first thing to do is arm yourselves."
       He had them collect the weapons lying about and distributed one to each
of the women.
       "Now follow me and do just as I say. You mustn't be afraid. Try to believe
that the god of this district is on your side."
       As he led the women toward the burning village, other victims emerged
from the shadows and joined them. Soon the group had grown into a small army
of nearly a hundred people. Women tearfully hugged loved ones: daughters were
reunited with parents, wives with husbands, mothers with children.
       At first, as the women described how Musashi had dealt with the bandits,
the men listened with shocked expressions on their faces, not believing that this
could be the idiot rōnin of Hōtengahara. When they did accept it, their gratitude

was obvious, despite the barrier imposed by their dialect.
        Turning to the men, Musashi told them to find weapons. "Anything'll do,
even a good, heavy stick or a length of fresh bamboo."
       No one disobeyed, or even questioned his orders.
       Musashi asked, "How many bandits are there in all?"
       "About fifty."
       "How many houses in the village?"
       "Seventy."
        Musashi calculated that there was probably a total of seven or eight
hundred people. Even allowing for old people and children, the brigands would
still be outnumbered by as much as ten to one.
        He smiled grimly at the thought that these peaceful villagers had believed
they had no recourse but to throw up their hands in despair. He knew that if
something was not done, the atrocity would be repeated. Tonight he wanted to
accomplish two things: show the villagers how to protect themselves and see that
the brigands were banished forever.
        "Sir," cried a man who had just come from the village. "They're on their
way here."
        Though the villagers were armed now, the news made them uneasy. They
showed signs of breaking and running.
        To restore confidence, Musashi said loudly, "There's nothing to be alarmed
about. I was expecting this. I want you to hide on both sides of the road, but first
listen to my instructions." He talked rapidly but calmly, briefly repeating points
for emphasis. "When they get here, I'll let them attack me. Then I'll pretend to
run away. They'll follow me. You—all of you— stay where you are. I won't need
any help.
        "After a time, they'll come back. When they do, attack. Make lots of noise;
take them by surprise. Strike at their sides, legs, chests—any area that's
unguarded. When you've taken care of the first bunch, hide again and wait for
the next one. Keep doing this until they're all dead."
        He barely had time to finish and the peasants to disperse before the
marauders appeared. From their dress and lack of coordination, Musashi guessed
that theirs was a primitive fighting force, of a sort that might have been common
long ago, when men hunted and fished for sustenance. The name Tokugawa
meant nothing to them, no more than did Toyotomi. The mountains were their
tribal home; the villagers existed to provide them with food and supplies.
        "Stop!" ordered the man at the head of the pack. There were about twenty

of them, some with crude swords, some with lances, one with a battle-ax,
another with a rusty spear. Silhouetted against the glow of the fire, their bodies
looked like demonic, jet-black shadows.
       "Is he the one?"
       "Yeah, that's him, all right."
       Some sixty feet ahead of them, Musashi stood his ground, blocking the
road. Disconcerted, they began to doubt their own strength, and for a short time
none of them moved.
       But only for a moment. Then Musashi's blazing eyes started to pull them
inexorably toward him.
       "You the son of a bitch trying to get in our way?"
       "Right!" roared Musashi, raising his sword and tearing into them. There
was a loud reverberation, followed by a whirlwind fray in which it was
impossible to make out individual movements. It was like a spinning swarm of
winged ants.
       The rice fields on one side of the road and the embankment lined with
trees and bushes on the other were ideal for Musashi, since they provided a
measure of cover, but after the first skirmish, he executed a strategic withdrawal.
      "See that?"
      "The bastard's running away!"
      "After him!"
       They pursued him to a far corner of the nearest field, where he turned and
faced them. With nothing behind him, his position seemed worse, but he kept his
opponents at bay by moving swiftly to right and left. Then the moment one of
them made a false move, Musashi struck.
       His dark form seemed to flit from place to place, a geyser of blood rising
before him each time he paused. The bandits who were not killed were soon too
dazed to fight, while Musashi grew sharper with every strike. It was a different
sort of battle from the one at Ichijōji. He did not have the feeling of standing on
the border between life and death, but he had reached a plane of selflessness,
body and sword performing without the need of conscious thought. His attackers
fled in complete disarray.
       A whisper went along the line of villagers. "They're coming." Then a
group of them jumped out of hiding and fell upon the first two or three bandits,
killing them almost effortlessly. The farmers melted into the darkness again, and
the process was repeated until all the bandits had been ambushed and slain.
      Counting the corpses bolstered the villagers' confidence.

     "They're not so strong after all," gloated one man.
     "Wait! Here comes another one."
     "Get him!"
     "No, don't attack. It's the rōnin."
       With a minimum of confusion, they lined up along the road like soldiers
being reviewed by their general. All eyes were fixed on Musashi's bloody
clothing and dripping sword, whose blade was chipped in a dozen places. He
threw it away and picked up a lance.
       "Our work's not done," he said. "Get yourselves some weapons and follow
me. By combining your strength, you can drive the marauders out of the village
and rescue your families."
       Not one man hesitated. The women and children also found weapons and
followed along.
       The damage to the village was not as extensive as they had feared, because
the dwellings were set well apart. But the terrified farm animals were raising a
great ruckus, and somewhere a baby was crying its lungs out. Loud popping
noises came from the roadside, where the fire had spread to a grove of green
bamboo.
       The bandits were nowhere in sight.
       "Where are they?" asked Musashi. "I seem to smell sake. Where would
there be a lot of sake in one place?"
       The villagers were so absorbed in gaping at the fires that nobody had
noticed the smell, but one of them said, "Must be the village headman's house.
He's got barrels of sake."
     "Then that's where we'll find them," said Musashi.
     As they advanced, more men came out of hiding and joined their ranks.
     Musashi was gratified by the growing spirit of unity.
     "That's it, there," said one man, pointing out a large house surrounded by an
     earthen wall.
       While the peasants were getting themselves organized, Musashi scaled the
wall and invaded the bandits' stronghold. The leader and his chief lieutenants
were ensconced in a large dirt-floored room, swilling sake and forcing their
attentions on young girls they were holding captive.
       "Don't get excited!" the leader shouted angrily in a rough, mountain
dialect. "He's only one man. I shouldn't have to do anything myself. The rest of
you take care of him." He was upbraiding an underling who had rushed in with
the news of the defeat outside the village.

      As their chief fell silent, the others became aware of the hum of angry
voices beyond the wall and stirred uneasily. Dropping half-eaten chickens and
sake cups, they jumped to their feet and instinctively reached for their weapons.
Then they stood there, staring at the entrance to the room.
      Musashi, using his lance as a pole, vaulted through a high side window,
landing directly behind the chief. The man whirled around, only to be impaled
on the lance. Letting out a fearsome "A-w-r-g," he grabbed with both hands the
lance lodged in his chest. Musashi calmly let go of the lance, and the man
toppled face down on the ground, the blade and most of the shaft projecting from
his back.
      The second man to attack Musashi was relieved of his sword. Musashi
sliced him through, brought the blade down on the head of a third man, and
thrust it into the chest of a fourth. The others made helter-skelter for the door.
Musashi hurled the sword at them and in a continuation of the same motion
extricated the lance from the chief's body.
      "Don't move!" he bellowed. He charged with the lance held horizontally,
parting the bandits like water struck with a pole. This gave him enough room to
make effective use of the long weapon, which he now swung with a deftness that
tested the very resiliency of its black oak shaft, striking sideways, slicing
downward, thrusting viciously forward.
      The bandits attempting to get out the gate found their way blocked by the
armed villagers. Some climbed the wall. When they hit the ground, most were
slaughtered on the spot. Of the few who succeeded in escaping, nearly all
received crippling wounds.
      For a time the air was filled with shouts of triumph from young and old,
male and female, and as the first flush of victory subsided, man and wife, parents
and children, hugged each other and shed tears of joy.
      In the midst of this ecstatic scene, someone asked, "What if they come
back?"
      There was a moment of sudden, anxious stillness.
      "They won't be back," Musashi said firmly. "Not to this village. But don't
be overconfident. Your business is using plows, not swords. If you grow too
proud of your fighting ability, the punishment heaven will mete out to you will
be worse than any raid by mountain devils."


      "Did you find out what happened?" Nagaoka Sado asked his two samurai

when they got back to the Tokuganji. In the distance, across field and swamp, he
could see that the light of the fires in the village was fading.
      "Everything's quieted down now."
      "Did you chase the bandits away? How much damage was done in the
      village?"
      "The villagers killed all but a few of them before we got there. The others
      got away."
       "Well, that's odd." He looked surprised, for if this was true, he had some
thinking to do about the way of governing in his own lord's district.
       On leaving the temple the following day, he directed his horse toward the
village, saying, "It's out of the way, but let's have a look."
       A priest came along to show them the way, and while they rode, Sado
observed, "Those bodies along the roadside don't look to me as though they were
cut down by farmers," and asked his samurai for more details.
       The villagers, forgoing sleep, were hard at work, burying corpses and
cleaning up debris from the conflagration. But when they saw Sado and the
samurai, they ran inside their houses and hid.
      "Get one of the villagers to come here, and let's find out exactly what
      happened," he said to the priest.
      The man who came back with the priest gave them a fairly detailed account
      of the night's events.
      "Now it begins to make sense," Sado said, nodding. "What's this rōnin's
      name?"
       The peasant, never having heard Musashi's name, cocked his head to one
side. When Sado insisted on knowing it, the priest asked about for a time and
came up with the required information.
       "Miyamoto Musashi?" Sado said thoughtfully. "Is he the man the boy
spoke of as his teacher?"
       "That's right. From the way he's been trying to develop a piece of waste
land on Hōtengahara, the villagers thought he was a little soft in the head."
       "I'd like to meet him," said Sado, but then he remembered the work
waiting for him in Edo. "Never mind; I'll talk to him the next time I come out
here." He turned his horse around and left the peasant standing by the road.
       A few minutes later, he reined up in front of the village headman's gate.
There, written in shiny ink on a fresh board, hung a sign: "Reminder for the
People of the Village: Your plow is your sword. Your sword is your plow.
Working in the fields, don't forget the invasion. Thinking of the invasion, don't

forget your fields. All things must be balanced and integrated. Most important,
do not oppose the Way of successive generations."
      "Hmm. Who wrote this?"
      The headman had finally come out and was now bowing on the ground
before Sado. "Musashi," he answered.
      Turning to the priest, Sado said, "Thank you for bringing us here. It's too
bad I couldn't meet this Musashi, but just now I don't have the time. I'll be back
this way before long."
