The Soul Polisher


       "Good evening," called Musashi.
       Nothing about Zushino Kōsuke's house suggested it was a place of
business. It lacked the grilled front of most shops, and there was no merchandise
on display. Musashi stood in the dirt-floored passageway running down the left
side of the house. To his right was a raised section, floored with tatami and
screened off from the room beyond it.
       The man sleeping on the tatami with his arms resting on a strongbox
resembled a Taoist sage Musashi had once seen in a painting. The long, thin face
was the grayish color of clay. Musashi could detect in it none of the keenness he
associated with sword craftsmen.
       "Good evening," Musashi repeated, a little louder.
       When his voice penetrated Kōsuke's torpor, the craftsman raised his head
very slowly; he might have been awakening from centuries of slumber.
       Wiping the saliva from his chin and sitting up straight, he asked
lackadaisically, "Can I help you?" Musashi's impression was that a man like this
might make swords, as well as souls, duller, but he nevertheless held out his own
weapon and explained why he was there.
       "Let me take a look at it." Kōsuke's shoulders perked up smartly. Placing
his left hand on his knee, he reached out with his right to take the sword,
simultaneously bowing his head toward it.
       "Strange creature," thought Musashi. "He barely acknowledges the
presence of a human being but bows politely to a sword."
       Holding a piece of paper in his mouth, Kōsuke quietly slid the blade out of
the scabbard. He stood it vertically in front of him and examined it from hilt to
tip. His eyes took on a bright glitter, reminding Musashi of glass eyes in a
wooden Buddhist statue.
       Snapping the weapon back into its scabbard, Kōsuke looked up inquiringly
at Musashi. "Come, have a seat," he said, moving back to make room and
offering Musashi a cushion.
      Musashi removed his sandals and stepped up into the room.
      "Has the sword been in your family for some generations?"
      "Oh, no," said Musashi. "It's not the work of a famous swordsmith, nothing

      like that."
      "Have you used it in battle, or do you carry it for the usual purposes?"
       "I haven't used it on the battlefield. There's nothing special about it. The
best you could say is that it's better than nothing."
      "Mm." Looking directly into Musashi's eyes, Kōsuke then asked, "How do
      you want it polished?"
      "How do I want it polished? What do you mean?"
      "Do you want it sharpened so it'll cut well?"
      "Well, it is a sword. The cleaner it cuts, the better."
      "I suppose so," agreed Kōsuke with a defeated sigh.
       "What's wrong with that? Isn't it the business of a craftsman to sharpen
swords so they'll cut properly?" As Musashi spoke, he squinted curiously into
Kōsuke's face.
       The self-proclaimed polisher of souls shoved the weapon toward Musashi
and said, "I can't do anything for you. Take it to somebody else."
       Strange, indeed, thought Musashi. He could not disguise a certain
vexation, but he said nothing. Kōsuke, his lips tightly set, made no attempt to
explain.
       While they sat silently staring at each other, a man from the neighborhood
stuck his head in the door. "Kōsuke, have you got a fishing pole? It's high tide,
and the fish are jumping. If you'll lend me a pole, I'll divide my catch with you."
       Kōsuke plainly regarded the man as one more burden he ought not to have
to bear. "Borrow one somewhere else," he rasped. "I don't believe in killing, and
I don't keep instruments for murder in my house."
       The man went quickly away, leaving Kōsuke looking grumpier than ever.
       Another man might have become discouraged and left, but Musashi's
curiosity held him there. There was something appealing about this man—not
wit nor intelligence, but a rough natural goodness like that of a Karatsu sake jar
or a tea bowl by Nonkō. Just as pottery often has a blemish evocative of its
closeness to the earth, Kōsuke had, in a semi-bald spot on his temple, a lesion of
some sort, which he'd covered with salve.
       While attempting to conceal his growing fascination, Musashi said, "What
is there to keep you from polishing my sword? Is it of such poor quality you
can't put a good edge on it?"
       "Of course not. You're the owner. You know as well as I do it's a perfectly
good Bizen sword. I also know you want it sharpened for the purpose of cutting
people."

        "Is there anything wrong with that?"
        "That's what they all say—what's wrong with wanting me to fix a sword so
it'll cut better? If the sword cuts, they're happy."
        "But a man bringing in a sword to be polished naturally wants—"
        "Just a minute." Kōsuke raised his hand. "It'll take some time to explain.
        First, I'd like you to take another look at the sign on the front of my shop."
"It says 'Souls polished,' or at least I think so. Is there any other way of
        reading the characters?"
        "No. You'll notice it doesn't say a word about polishing swords. My
business is polishing the souls of the samurai who come in, not their weapons.
People don't understand, but that's what I was taught when I studied sword
polishing."
        "I see," said Musashi, although he didn't really.
        "Since I try to abide by my master's teachings, I refuse to polish the swords
of samurai who take pleasure in killing people."
        "Well, you have a point there. But tell me, who was this master of yours?"
        "That's written on the sign too. I studied in the House of Hon'ami, under
Hon'ami Kōetsu himself." Kōsuke squared his shoulders proudly as he uttered
his master's name.
        "That's interesting. I happen to have made the acquaintance of your master
and his excellent mother, Myōshū." Musashi went on to tell how he had met
them in the field near the Rendaiji and later spent a few days at their house.
        Kōsuke, astonished, scrutinized him closely for a moment. "Are you by
any chance the man who caused a great stir in Kyoto some years ago by
defeating the Yoshioka School at Ichijōji? Miyamoto Musashi was the name, I
believe."
        "That is my name." Musashi's face reddened slightly.
        Kōsuke moved back a bit and bowed deferentially, saying, "Forgive me. I
shouldn't have been lecturing you. I had no idea I was talking to the famous
Miyamoto Musashi."
        "Don't give it a second thought. Your words were very instructive.
Kōetsu's character comes through in the lessons he teaches his disciples."
        "As I'm sure you know, the Hon'ami family served the Ashikaga shōguns.
From time to time they've also been called upon to polish the Emperor's swords.
Kōetsu was always saying that Japanese swords were created not to kill or injure
people but to maintain the imperial rule and protect the nation, to subdue devils
and drive out evil. The sword is the samurai's soul; he carries it for no other

purpose than to maintain his own integrity. It is an ever-present admonition to
the man who rules over other men and seeks in doing so to follow the Way of
Life. It's only natural that the craftsman who polishes the sword must also polish
the swordsman's spirit."
        "How true," agreed Musashi.
        "Kōetsu said that to see a good sword is to see the sacred light, the spirit of
the nation's peace and tranquility. He hated touching a bad sword. Even being
near one used to nauseate him."
        "I see. Are you saying you sensed something evil in my sword?"
        "No, not in the least. I just felt a little depressed. Since coming to Edo, I've
worked on any number of weapons, but none of their owners seem to have an
inkling of the sword's true meaning. I sometimes doubt they have souls to polish.
All they care about is quartering a man or splitting his head open—helmet and
all. It got so tiresome. That's why I put up a new sign a few days ago. It doesn't
seem to have had much effect, though."
        "And I came in asking for the same thing, didn't I? I understand how you
feel."
        "Well, that's a beginning. Things may turn out a little differently with you.
But frankly, when I saw that blade of yours, I was shocked. All those nicks and
stains, stains made by human flesh. I thought you were just one more senseless
rōnin, proud of himself for committing a number of meaningless murders."
        Musashi bowed his head. It was the voice of Kōetsu, coming from
Kōsuke's mouth. "I'm grateful for this lesson," he said. "I've carried a sword
since I was a boy, but I've never really given sufficient thought to the spirit that
resides in it. In the future, I'll pay heed to what you've said."
        Kōsuke appeared vastly relieved. "In that case, I'll polish the sword for
you. Or perhaps I should say I consider it a privilege for one in my profession to
be able to polish the soul of a samurai like yourself."
       Twilight had faded, and the lights had been lit. Musashi decided it was time
       to go.
       "Wait," said Kōsuke. "Do you have another sword to carry while I'm
       working on this one?"
       "No; I have only the one long sword."
        "In that case, why don't you pick out a replacement? None of the swords I
have here now are very good, I'm afraid, but come and take a look."
        He guided Musashi into the back room, where he took several swords out
of a cabinet and lined them up on the tatami. "You can take any one of these," he

offered.
       Despite the craftsman's modest disavowal, they were all weapons of
excellent quality. Musashi had difficulty choosing from the dazzling display, but
finally he selected one and immediately fell in love with it. Just holding it in his
hands, he sensed its maker's dedication. Drawing the blade from the scabbard
confirmed his impression; it was indeed a beautiful piece of workmanship,
probably dating from the Yoshino period in the fourteenth century. Nagged by
the doubt that it was too elegant for him, once he had brought it close to the light
and examined it, he found his hands reluctant to let it go.
       "May I take this one?" he asked. He could not bring himself to use the
word "borrow."
       "You have the eye of an expert," observed Kōsuke, as he put away the
other swords.
       For once in his life, Musashi was swamped by covetousness. He knew it
was futile to mention buying the sword outright; the price would be far beyond
his means. But he couldn't help himself.
      "I don't suppose you'd consider selling me this sword, would you?" he
      asked.
      "Why not?"
      "How much are you asking for it?"
      "I'll let you have it for what I paid for it."
      "How much was that?"
      "Twenty pieces of gold."
      An almost inconceivable sum to Musashi. "I'd better give it back," he said
      hesitantly.
      "Why?" asked Kōsuke with a puzzled look. "I'll lend it to you for as long as
      you wish. Go on, take it."
       "No; that'd make me feel even worse. Wanting it the way I do is bad
enough. If I wore it for a while, it would be torture to part with it."
       "Are you really so attached to it?" Kōsuke looked at the sword, then at
Musashi. "All right then, I'll give it to you—in wedlock, as it were. But I expect
an appropriate gift in exchange."
       Musashi was baffled; he had absolutely nothing to offer.
       "I heard from Kōetsu that you carve statues. I'd be honored if you'd make
me an image of Kannon. That would be sufficient payment."
       The last Kannon Musashi had carved was the one he'd left in Hōtengahara.
"I have nothing on hand," he said. "But in the next few days, I can carve

something for you. May I have the sword then?"
       "Certainly. I didn't mean to imply I expected it this minute. By the way,
instead of putting up at that inn, why don't you come and stay with us? We have
a room we're not using."
       "That would be perfect," said Musashi. "If I moved in tomorrow, I could
start on the statue right away."
       "Come and take a look at it," urged Kōsuke, who was also happy and
excited.
       Musashi followed him down the outside passageway, at the end of which
was a flight of half a dozen steps. Tucked in between the first and second floors,
not quite belonging to either, was an eight-mat room. Through the window
Musashi could see the dew-laden leaves of an apricot tree.
       Pointing at a roof covered with oyster shells, Kōsuke said, "That's my
workshop there."
       The craftsman's wife, as if summoned by a secret signal, arrived with sake
and some tidbits. When the two men sat down, the distinction between host and
guest seemed to evaporate. They relaxed, legs stretched out, and opened their
hearts to each other, oblivious of the restraints normally imposed by etiquette.
The talk, of course, turned to their favorite subject.
       "Everybody pays lip service to the importance of the sword," said Kōsuke.
"Anybody'll tell you the sword's the 'soul of the samurai' and that a sword is one
of the country's three sacred treasures. But the way people actually treat swords
is scandalous. And I include samurai and priests, as well as townsmen. I took it
upon myself at one time to go around to shrines and old houses where there were
once whole collections of beautiful swords, and I can tell you the situation is
shocking."
       Kōsuke's pale cheeks were ruddy now. His eyes burned with enthusiasm,
and the saliva that gathered at the corners of his mouth occasionally flew in a
spray right into his companion's face.
       "Almost none of the famous swords from the past are being properly taken
care of. At Suwa Shrine in Shinano Province there are more than three hundred
swords. They could be classed as heirlooms, but I found only five that weren't
rusted. Ōmishima Shrine in Iyo is famous for its collection—three thousand
swords dating back many centuries. But after spending a whole month there, I
found only ten that were in good condition. It's disgusting!" Kōsuke caught his
breath and continued. "The problem seems to be that the older and more famous
the sword is, the more the owner is inclined to make sure it's stored in a safe

place. But then nobody can get at it to take care of it, and the blade gets rustier
and rustier.
       "The owners are like parents who protect their children so jealously that
the children grow up to be fools. In the case of children, more are being born all
the time—doesn't make any difference if a few are stupid. But swords . . ."
       Pausing to suck in the spit, he raised his thin shoulders even higher and
with a gleam in his eyes declared, "We already have all the good swords there'll
ever be. During the civil wars, the swordsmiths got careless—no, downright
sloppy! They forgot their techniques, and swords have been deteriorating ever
since.
       "The only thing to do is to take better care of the swords from the earlier
periods. The craftsmen today may try to imitate the older swords, but they'll
never turn out anything as good. Doesn't it make you angry to think about it?"
       Abruptly he stood up and said, "Just look at this." Bringing out a sword of
awesome length, he laid it down for his guest to inspect. "It's a splendid weapon,
but it's covered with the worst kind of rust."
       Musashi's heart skipped a beat. The sword was without doubt Sasaki
Kojirō's Drying Pole. A flood of memories came rushing back.
       Controlling his emotions, he said calmly, "That's really a long one, isn't it?
Must take quite a samurai to handle it."
       "I imagine so," agreed Kōsuke. "There aren't many like it." Taking the
blade out, he turned the back toward Musashi and handed it to him by the hilt.
"See," he said. "It's rusted badly—here and here and here. But he's used it
anyway."
       "I see."
       "This is a rare piece of workmanship, probably forged in the Kamakura
period. It'll take a lot of work, but I can probably fix it up. On these ancient
swords, the rust is only a relatively thin film. If this were a new blade, I'd never
be able to get the stains off. On new swords, rust spots are like malignant sores;
they eat right into the heart of the metal."
       Reversing the sword's position so that the back of the blade was toward
Kōsuke, Musashi said, "Tell me, did the owner of this sword bring it in himself?"
       "No. I was at Lord Hosokawa's on business, and one of the older retainers,
Iwama Kakubei, asked me to drop in at his house on the way back. I did, and he
gave it to me to work on. Said it belonged to a guest of his."
       "The fittings are good too," remarked Musashi, his eyes still focused on
the weapon.

       "It's a battle sword. The man's been carrying it on his back up till now, but
he wants to carry it at his side, so I've been asked to refit the scabbard. He must
be a very large man. Either that or he has a very practiced arm."
       Kōsuke had begun to feel his sake. His tongue was becoming a little thick.
Musashi concluded it was time to take his leave, which he did with a minimum
of ceremony.
       It was much later than he thought. There were no lights in the
neighborhood.
       Once inside the inn, he groped through the darkness to the stairway and up
to the second floor. Two pallets had been spread, but both were empty. Iori's
absence made him uncomfortable, for he suspected the boy was wandering about
lost on the streets of this great unfamiliar city.
       Going back downstairs, he shook the night watchman awake. "Isn't he
back yet?" asked the man, who seemed more surprised than Musashi. "I thought
he was with you."
       Knowing he would only stare at the ceiling until Iori came back, Musashi
went out into the black-lacquer night again and stood with arms crossed under
the eaves.
