A Cricket in the Grass


       Jōtarō jogged along at a good pace, paying little attention to the road.
Suddenly he halted and looked around, wondering if he'd lost his way. "I don't
remember passing here before," he thought nervously.
       Samurai houses fringed the remains of an old fortress. One section of the
compound had been rebuilt to serve as the official residence of the recently
appointed Ōkubo Nagayasu, but the rest of the area, rising like a natural mound,
was covered with weeds and trees. The stone ramparts were crumbling, having
been ravaged many years earlier by an invading army. The fortification looked
primitive compared to the castle complexes of the last forty to fifty years. There
was no moat, no bridge, nothing that could properly be described as a castle
wall. It had probably belonged to one of the local gentry in the days before the
great civil war daimyō incorporated their rural domains into larger feudal
principalities.
       On one side of the road were paddies and marshland; on the other, walls;
and beyond, a cliff, atop which the fortress must once have stood.
       As he tried to get his bearings, Jōtarō's eyes traveled along the cliff. Then
he saw something move, stop, and move again. At first it looked like an animal,
but soon the stealthily moving silhouette became the outline of a man. Jōtarō
shivered but stood riveted to the spot.
       The man lowered a rope with a hook attached to the top. After he had slid
down the full length of the rope and found a foothold, he shook the hook loose
and repeated the process. When he reached the bottom, he disappeared into a
copse.
       Jōtarō's curiosity was thoroughly aroused.
       A few minutes later, he saw the man walking along the low rises
separating the paddies and apparently heading straight for him. He nearly
panicked, but relaxed when he could make out the bundle on the man's back.
"What a waste of time! Nothing but a farmer stealing kindling." He thought the
man must have been crazy to risk scaling the cliff for nothing more than some
firewood. He was disappointed too; his mystery had become unbearably
humdrum. But then came his second shock. As the man strolled up the road past
the tree Jōtarō was hiding behind, the boy had to stifle a gasp. He was sure the

dark figure was Daizō.
       "It couldn't be," he told himself.
       The man had a black cloth around his face and wore peasant's knickers,
leggings and light straw sandals.
       The mysterious figure turned off onto a path skirting a hill. No one with
such sturdy shoulders and buoyant stride could be in his fifties, as Daizō was.
Having convinced himself that he was mistaken, Jōtarō followed. He had to get
back to the inn, and the man just might, unwittingly, help him find his way.
       When the man came to a road marker, he set down his bundle, which
appeared to be very heavy. As he leaned over to read the writing on the stone,
something about him again struck Jōtarō as familiar.
       While the man climbed the path up the hill, Jōtarō examined the marker,
on which were carved the words "Pine Tree on Head-burying Mound—Above."
This was where the local inhabitants buried the severed skulls of criminals and
defeated warriors.
       The branches of an immense pine were clearly visible against the night
sky. By the time Jōtarō reached the top of the rise, the man had seated himself by
the roots of the tree and was smoking a pipe.
       Daizō! No question about it now. A peasant would never carry tobacco
with him. Some had been successfully grown domestically, but on such a limited
scale that it was still very expensive. Even in the relatively well-off Kansai
district, it was considered a luxury. And up in Sendai, when Lord Date smoked,
his scribe felt constrained to make an entry in his daily journal: "Morning, three
smokes; afternoon, four smokes; bedtime, one smoke."
       Financial considerations aside, most people who had a chance to try
tobacco found it made them dizzy or even nauseated. Though appreciated for its
flavor, it was generally regarded as a narcotic.
       Jōtarō knew that smokers were few; he also knew that Daizō was one of
them, for he had frequently seen him drawing on a handsomely made ceramic
pipe. Not that this had ever before struck him as strange. Daizō was wealthy and
a man of expensive tastes.
       "What's he up to?" he thought impatiently. Accustomed now to the danger
of the situation, he gradually crept closer.
       Having finished his pipe, the merchant got to his feet, removed his black
kerchief and tucked it into his waist. Then slowly he walked around the pine.
The next thing Jōtarō knew, he was holding a shovel in his hands. Where had
that come from? Leaning on the shovel, Daizō looked around at the night

scenery for a moment, apparently fixing the location in his mind.
        Seemingly satisfied, Daizō rolled aside a large rock on the north side of the
tree and began digging energetically, looking neither right nor left. Jōtarō
watched the hole grow nearly deep enough for a man to stand in. Finally, Daizō
stopped and wiped the sweat from his face with his kerchief. Jōtarō remained as
still as a rock and totally baffled.
        "This'll do," the merchant murmured softly, as he finished trampling down
the soft dirt at the bottom of the hole. For an instant, Jōtarō had a peculiar
impulse to call out and warn him not to bury himself, but he held back.
        Jumping up to the surface, Daizō proceeded to drag the heavy bundle from
the tree to the edge of the hole and undo the hempen cord around the top. At first
Jōtarō thought the sack was made of cloth, but now he could see that it was a
heavy leather cloak, of the sort generals wore over their armor. Inside was
another sack, made of tenting or some similar fabric. When this was opened, the
top of an incredible stack of gold came into view—semi-cylindrical ingots made
by pouring the molten metal into half sections of bamboo, split lengthwise.
        There was more to come. Loosening his obi, Daizō unburdened himself of
several dozen large, newly minted gold pieces, which had been stuffed into his
stomach wrapper, the back of his kimono and other parts of his clothing. Having
placed these neatly on top of the ingots, he tied both containers securely and
dropped the bundle into the pit, as he might have dumped the carcass of a dog.
He then shoveled the dirt back in, stamped on it with his feet, and replaced the
rock. He finished off by scattering dry grass and twigs around the rock.
        Then he set about transforming himself back into the well-known Daizō of
Narai, affluent dealer in herbs. The peasant's garb, wrapped around the shovel,
went into a thicket not likely to be explored by passersby. He donned his
traveling cloak and hung his money pouch around his neck in the manner of
itinerant priests. As he slipped his feet into his zōri, he mumbled with
satisfaction, "Quite a night's work."
        When Daizō was out of hearing range, Jōtarō emerged from his hiding
place and went to the rock. Though he scrutinized the spot carefully, he could
discern no trace of what he had just witnessed. He stared at the ground as if at a
magician's empty palm.
        "I'd better get moving," he thought suddenly. "If I'm not there when he gets
back to the inn, he'll be suspicious." Since the lights of the town were now
visible beneath him, he had no trouble setting his course. Running like the wind,
he somehow contrived to stay on back roads and keep well out of Daizō's path.

      It was with an expression of perfect innocence that he climbed the stairs at
the inn and entered their room. He was in luck; Sukeichi was slumped against
the lacquered traveling case, alone and sound asleep. A thin trickle of saliva ran
down his chin.
      "Hey, Sukeichi, you'll catch cold there." Purposely Jōtarō shook him to
wake him up.
      "Oh, it's you, is it?" drawled Sukeichi, rubbing his eyes. "What were you
doing out this late without telling the master?"
      "Are you crazy? I've been back for hours. If you'd been awake, you'd have
known that."
      "Don't try to fool me. I know you went out with that woman from the
Sumiya. If you're running around after a whore now, I hate to think what you'll
be acting like when you grow up."
      Just then, Daizō open the shoji. "I'm back," was all he said.


      An early morning start was necessary in order to make Edo before
nightfall. Jinnai had his troupe, Akemi restored to it, on the road well before
sunrise. Daizō, Sukeichi and Jōtarō, however, took their time over breakfast and
were not ready to leave until the sun was fairly high in the sky.
      Daizō led the way, as usual, but Jōtarō trailed behind with Sukeichi, which
was unusual.
      Finally Daizō stopped, asking, "What's the matter with you this morning?"
"Pardon?" Jōtarō did his best to appear nonchalant.
     "Is something wrong?"
     "No, nothing at all. Why do you ask?"
     "You look glum. Not like you."
      "It's nothing, sir. I was just thinking. If I stay with you, I don't know
whether I'll ever find my teacher or not. I'd like to go and look for him on my
own, if it's all right with you."
      Without a moment's hesitation, Daizō replied, "It isn't!"
      Jōtarō had sidled up and started to take hold of the man's arm, but now he
withdrew his hand and asked nervously, "Why not?"
      "Let's rest here awhile," said Daizō, lowering himself onto the grassy plain
for which the province of Musashi was famous. Once seated, he gestured to
Sukeichi to go on ahead.
      "But I have to find my teacher—as soon as possible," pleaded Jōtarō.

       "I told you, you're not going off by yourself." Looking very stern, Daizō
put his ceramic pipe to his lips and took a puff. "As of today, you're my son."
       He sounded serious. Jōtarō swallowed hard, but then Daizō laughed, and
the boy, assuming it was all a joke, said, "I couldn't do that. I don't want to be
your son."
       "What?"
       "You're a merchant. I want to be a samurai."
       "I'm sure you'll find that Daizō of Narai is no ordinary townsman, without
honor or background. Become my adopted son, and I'll make a real samurai out
of you."
       Jōtarō realized with dismay that he meant what he was saying. "May I ask
why you decided this so suddenly?" the boy asked.
       In a trice, Daizō seized him and pinioned him to his side. Putting his
mouth to the boy's ear, he whispered, "You saw me, didn't you, you little
bastard?" "Saw you?"
      "Yes; you were watching, weren't you?"
      "I don't know what you're talking about. Watching what?"
      "What I did last night."
      Jōtarō tried his best to stay calm.
      "Why did you do that?"
      The boy's defenses were close to collapse.
      "Why were you prying into my private affairs?"
      "I'm sorry!" blurted Jōtarō. "I'm really sorry. I won't tell a soul."
       "Keep your voice down! I'm not going to punish you, but in return, you're
going to become my adopted son. If you refuse, you give me no choice but to
kill you. Now, don't force me to do that. I think you're a fine boy, very likable."
       For the first time in his life, Jōtarō began to feel real fear. "I'm sorry," he
repeated fervently. "Don't kill me. I don't want to die!" Like a captured skylark,
he wriggled timidly in Daizō's arms, afraid that if he really struggled, the hand of
death would descend on him forthwith.
       Although the boy felt his grip to be viselike, Daizō was not holding him
tightly at all. In fact, when he pulled the boy onto his lap, his touch was almost
tender. "Then you'll be my son, won't you?" His stubbly chin scratched Jōtarō's
cheek.
       Though he couldn't have identified it, what fettered Jōtarō was an adult,
masculine scent. He was like an infant on Daizō's knee, unable to resist, unable
even to speak.

       "It's for you to decide. Will you let me adopt you, or will you die? Answer
me, now!"
       With a wail, the boy burst into tears. He rubbed his face with dirty fingers
until muddy little puddles formed on both sides of his nose.
      "Why cry? You're lucky to have such an opportunity. I guarantee you'll be a
      great samurai when I finish with you."
      "But ..."
      "What is it?"
      "You're ... you're ..."
      "Yes?"
      "I can't say it."
      "Out with it. Speak. A man should state his thoughts simply and clearly."
       "You're ... well, your business is stealing." Had it not been for the hands
resting lightly on him, Jōtarō would have been off like a gazelle. But Daizō's lap
was a deep pit, the walls of which prevented him from moving.
       "Ha, ha," chortled Daizō, giving him a playful slap on the back. "Is that all
that's bothering you?"
       "Y-y-yes."
       The big man's shoulders shook with laughter. "I might be the sort of person
who'd steal the whole country, but a common burglar or highwayman I am not.
Look at Ieyasu or Hideyoshi or Nobunaga—they're all warriors who stole or
tried to steal the whole nation, aren't they? Just stick with me, and one of these
days you'll understand."
       "Then you're not a thief?"
       "I wouldn't bother with a business that's so unprofitable." Lifting the boy
off his knee, he said, "Now stop blubbering, and let's be on our way. From this
moment on, you're my son. I'll be a good father to you. Your end of the bargain
is that you never breathe a word to anyone about what you think you saw last
night. If you do, I'll wring your neck."
       Jōtarō believed him.
