A Plate of Loaches


       Musashi had been roaming the countryside, devoting himself to ascetic
practices, punishing his body to perfect his soul. He was more resolved than ever
to go it alone: if that meant being hungry, sleeping out in the open in cold and
rain and walking about in filthy rags, then so be it. In his heart was a dream that
would never be satisfied by taking a position in Lord Date's employ, even if his
lordship were to offer him his entire three-million-bushel fief.
       After the long trip up the Nakasendō, he had spent only a few nights in
Edo before taking to the road again, this time north to Sendai. The money given
him by Ishimoda Geki had been a burden on his conscience; from the moment
he'd discovered it, he'd known he'd find no peace until it was returned.
       Now, a year and a half later, he found himself on Hōtengahara, a plain in
Shimōsa Province, east of Edo, little changed since the rebellious Taira no
Masakado and his troops had rampaged through the area in the tenth century.
The plain was a dismal place still, sparsely settled and growing nothing of value,
only weeds, a few trees and some scrubby bamboo and rushes. The sun, low on
the horizon, reddened the pools of stagnant water but left the grass and brush
colorless and indistinct.
       "What now?" Musashi mumbled, resting his weary legs at a crossroads.
His body felt listless and still waterlogged from the cloudburst he'd been caught
in a few days earlier at Tochigi Pass. The raw evening damp made him eager to
find human habitation. For the past two nights he'd slept under the stars, but now
he longed for the warmth of a hearth and some real food, even simple peasant
fare such as millet boiled with rice.
       A touch of saltiness in the breeze suggested that the sea was near. If he
headed toward it, he reasoned, he just might find a house, perhaps even a fishing
village or small port. If not, then he'd have to resign himself to yet another night
in the autumn grasses, under the great autumn moon.
       He realized with no small hint of irony that were he a more poetic type, he
might savor these moments in a poignantly lonely landscape. As it was, he
wanted only to escape it, to be with people, to have some decent food and get
some rest. Yet the incessant buzzing of the insects seemed to be reciting a litany
to his solitary wandering.

        Musashi stopped on a dirt-covered bridge. A definite splashing noise
seemed to rise above the peaceful rippling of the narrow river. An otter? In the
fading daylight, he strained his eyes until he could just make out a figure
kneeling in the hollow by the water's edge. He chuckled to note that the face of
the young boy peering up at him was distinctly otter-like.
        "What are you up to down there?" Musashi called in a friendly voice.
"Loaches," was the laconic reply. The boy was shaking a wicker basket in the
water to clean the mud and sand off his wriggling catch.
       "Catch many?" Musashi inquired, loath to sever this newly found bond with
       another human.
       "Aren't many around. It's already fall."
       "How about letting me have some?"
       "My loaches?"
       "Yes, just a handful. I'll pay you for them."
        "Sorry. These are for my father." Hugging the basket, he leapt nimbly up
the bank and was off like a shot into the darkness.
        "Speedy little devil, I must say." Musashi, alone once again, laughed. He
was reminded of his own childhood and of Jōtarō. "I wonder what's become of
him," he mused. Jōtarō had been fourteen when Musashi had last seen him. Soon
he would be sixteen. "Poor boy. He accepted me as his teacher, loved me as his
teacher, served me as his teacher, and what did I do for him? Nothing."
        Absorbed in his memories, he forgot his fatigue. He stopped and stood
still. The moon had risen, bright and full. It was on nights like this that Otsū
liked to play the flute. In the insects' voices he heard the sound of laughter,
Otsū’s and Jōtarō's together.
        Turning his head to one side, he spotted a light. He turned the rest of his
body in the same direction and made straight for it.
        Lespedeza grew all around the isolated shack, almost as high as the
lopsided roof. The walls were covered with calabash vines, the blossoms looking
from a distance like enormous dewdrops. As he drew nearer, he was startled by
the great angry snort of an unsaddled horse tied up beside the hovel.
        "Who's there?"
        Musashi recognized the voice coming from the shack as that of the boy
with the loaches. Smiling, he called, "How about putting me up for the night? I'll
leave first thing in the morning."
        The boy came to the door and looked Musashi over carefully. After a
moment, he said, "All right. Come in."

       The house was as rickety as any Musashi had ever seen. Moonlight poured
through cracks in the walls and roof. After removing his cloak, he couldn't find
even a peg to hang it on. Wind from below made the floor drafty, despite the
reed mat covering it.
       The boy knelt before his guest in formal fashion and said, "Back there at
the river you said you wanted some loaches, didn't you? Do you like loaches?"
      In these surroundings, the boy's formality so surprised Musashi that he
      merely stared.
      "What are you looking at?"
      "How old are you?"
      "Twelve."
       Musashi was impressed by his face. It was as dirty as a lotus root just
pulled out of the ground, and his hair looked and smelled like a bird's nest. Yet
there was character in his expression. His cheeks were chubby, and his eyes,
shining like beads through the encircling grime, were magnificent.
       "I have a little millet and rice," said the boy hospitably. "And now that I've
given some to my father, you can have the rest of the loaches, if you want them."
      "Thanks."
      "I suppose you'd like some tea too."
      "Yes, if it's not too much trouble."
      "Wait here." He pushed open a screechy door and went into the next room.
       Musashi heard him breaking firewood, then fanning the flame in an
earthen hibachi. Before long, the smoke filling the shack drove a host of insects
outdoors.
       The boy came back with a tray, which he placed on the floor in front of
Musashi. Falling to immediately, Musashi devoured the salty broiled loaches, the
millet and rice and the sweetish black bean paste in record time.
      "That was good," he said gratefully.
      "Was it really?" The boy seemed to take pleasure in another person's
      happiness.
      A well-behaved lad, thought Musashi. "I'd like to express my thanks to the
      head of the house. Has he gone to bed?"
      "No; he's right in front of you." The boy pointed at his own nose. "Are you
      here all alone?"
      "Yes."
      "Oh, I see." There was an awkward pause. "And what do you do for a
      living?" Musashi asked.

       "I rent out the horse and go along as a groom. We used to farm a little too.
... Oh, we've run out of lamp oil. You must be ready for bed anyway, aren't you?"
       Musashi agreed that he was and lay down on a worn straw pallet spread
next to the wall. The hum of the insects was soothing. He fell asleep, but perhaps
because of his physical exhaustion, he broke into a sweat. Then he dreamed he
heard rain falling.
       The sound in his dream made him sit up with a start. No mistake about it.
What he heard now was a knife or sword being honed. As he reached reflexively
for his sword, the boy called in to him, "Can't you sleep?"
       How had he known that? Amazed, Musashi said, "What are you doing
sharpening a blade at this hour?" The question was uttered so tensely that it
sounded more like the counterblow of a sword than an inquiry.
       The boy broke into laughter. "Did I scare you? You look too strong and
brave to be frightened so easily."
       Musashi was silent. He wondered if he had come upon an all-seeing
demon in the guise of a peasant boy.
       When the scraping of the blade on the whetstone began again, Musashi
went to the door. Through a crack, he could see that the other room was a
kitchen with a small sleeping space at one end. The boy was kneeling in the
moonlight next to the window with a large jug of water at his side. The sword he
was sharpening was of a type farmers used.
       "What do you intend to do with that?" asked Musashi.
       The boy glanced toward the door but continued with his work. After a few
more minutes, he wiped the blade, which was about a foot and a half long, and
held it up to inspect it. It glistened brightly in the moonlight.
      "Look," he said, "do you think I can cut a man in half with this?"
      Depends on whether you know how."
      "Oh, I'm sure I do."
      "Do you have someone particular in mind?"
      "My father."
       "Your father?" Musashi pushed open the door. "I hope that's not your idea
of a joke."
       "I'm not joking."
       "You can't mean you intend to kill your father. Even the rats and wasps in
this forsaken wilderness have better sense than to kill their parents."
      "But if I don't cut him in two, I can't carry him."
      "Carry him where?"

      "I have to take him to the burial ground."
      "You mean he's dead?"
      "Yes."
       Musashi looked again at the far wall. It had not occurred to him that the
bulky shape he had seen there might be a body. Now he saw that it was indeed
the corpse of an old man, laid out straight, with a pillow under its head and a
kimono draped over it. By its side was a bowl of rice, a cup of water and a
helping of broiled loaches on a wooden plate.
       Recalling how he had unwittingly asked the boy to share the loaches
intended as an offering to the dead man's spirit, Musashi felt a twinge of
embarrassment. At the same time, he admired the boy for having the coolness to
conceive of cutting the body into pieces so as to be able to carry it. His eyes
riveted on the boy's face, for a few moments he said nothing.
      "When did he die?"
      "This morning."
      "How far away is the graveyard?"
      "It's up in the hills."
      "Couldn't you have got somebody to take him there for you?"
      "I don't have any money."
      "Let me give you some."
       The boy shook his head. "No. My father didn't like to accept gifts. He
didn't like to go to the temple either. I can manage, thank you."
       From the boy's spirit and courage, his stoic yet practical manner, Musashi
suspected that his father had not been born an ordinary peasant. There had to be
something to explain the son's remarkable self-sufficiency.
       In deference to the dead man's wishes, Musashi kept his money and
instead offered to contribute the strength needed to transport the body in one
piece. The boy agreed, and together they loaded the corpse on the horse. When
the road got steep, they took it off the horse, and Musashi carried it on his back.
The graveyard turned out to be a small clearing under a chestnut tree, where a
solitary round stone served as a marker.
       After the burial, the boy placed some flowers on the grave and said, "My
grandfather, grandmother and mother are buried here too." He folded his hands
in prayer. Musashi joined him in silent supplication for the family's repose.
      "The gravestone doesn't seem to be very old," he remarked. "When did your
      family settle here?"
      "During my grandfather's time."

      "Where were they before that?"
        "My grandfather was a samurai in the Mogami clan, but after his lord's
defeat, he burned our genealogy and everything else. There was nothing left."
        "I don't see his name carved on the stone. There's not even a family crest
or a date."
        "When he died, he ordered that nothing appear on the stone. He was very
strict. One time some men came from the Gamō fief, another time from the Date
fief, and offered him a position, but he refused. He said a samurai shouldn't serve
more than one master. That was the way he was about the stone too. Since he'd
become a farmer, he said putting his name on it would reflect shame on his dead
lord."
      "Do you know your grandfather's name?"
      "Yes. It was Misawa Iori. My father, since he was only a farmer, dropped
      the surname and just called himself San'emon."
      "And your name?"
      "Sannosuke."
      "Do you have any relatives?"
      "An older sister, but she went away a long time ago. I don't know where she
      is."
      "No one else?"
      "No."
      "How do you plan to make your living now?"
        "Same as before, I guess." But then he added hurriedly, "Look, you're a
shugyōsha, aren't you? You must travel around just about everywhere. Take me
with you. You can ride my horse and I'll be your groom."
        As Musashi turned the boy's request over in his mind, he gazed out upon
the land below them. Since it was fertile enough to support a plethora of weeds,
he could not understand why it was not cultivated. It was certainly not because
the people hereabouts were well off; he had seen evidence of poverty
everywhere.
        Civilization, Musashi was thinking, does not flourish until men have
learned to exercise control over the forces of nature. He wondered why the
people here in the center of the Kanto Plain were so powerless, why they
allowed themselves to be oppressed by nature. As the sun rose, Musashi caught
glimpses of small animals and birds reveling in the riches that man had not yet
learned to harvest. Or so it seemed.
        He was soon reminded that Sannosuke, despite his courage and

independence, was still a child. By the time the sunlight made the dewy foliage
glisten and they were ready to start back, the boy was no longer sad, seemed in
fact to have put all thoughts of his father completely out of mind.
       Halfway down the hill, he began badgering Musashi for an answer to his
proposal. "I'm ready to start today," he declared. "Just think, anywhere you go,
you'll be able to ride the horse, and I'll be there to wait on you."
       This elicited a noncommittal grunt. While Sannosuke had much to
recommend him, Musashi questioned whether he should again put himself in the
position of being responsible for a boy's future. Jōtarō—he had natural ability,
but how had he benefited by attaching himself to Musashi? And now that he had
disappeared to heaven knew where, Musashi felt his responsibility even more
keenly. Still, Musashi thought, if a man dwells only on the dangers ahead, he
cannot advance a single step, let alone make his way through life successfully.
Furthermore, in the case of a child, no one, not even his parents, can actually
guarantee his future. "Is it really possible to decide objectively what's good for a
child and what's not?" he asked himself. "If it's a matter of developing
Sannosuke's talents and guiding him in the right direction, I can do that. I guess
that's about as much as anyone can do."
      "Promise, won't you? Please," the boy insisted.
      "Sannosuke, do you want to be a groom all your life?"
      "Of course not. I want to be a samurai."
      "That's what I thought. But if you come with me and become my pupil,
      you'll be in for a lot of rough times, you know."
       The boy threw down the rope and, before Musashi knew what he was up
to, knelt on the ground below the horse's head. Bowing deeply, he said, "I beg
you, sir, make a samurai of me. That's what my father wanted, but there was no
one we could ask for help."
       Musashi dismounted, looked around for a moment, then picked up a stick
and handed it to Sannosuke. He found another one for himself and said, "I want
you to strike me with that stick. After I've seen how you handle it, I can decide
whether you have the talent to be a samurai."
       "If I hit you, will you say yes?"
       "Try it and see." Musashi laughed.
       Sannosuke took a firm grip on his weapon and rushed forward as if
possessed. Musashi showed no mercy. Time and again the boy was struck—on
the shoulders, in the face, on the arms. After each setback, he staggered away but
always came back to the attack.

      "Pretty soon he'll be in tears," thought Musashi.
      But Sannosuke would not give up. When his stick broke in two, he
charged empty-handed.
      "What do you think you're doing, you runt?" Musashi snapped with
deliberate meanness. He seized the boy by his obi and threw him flat on the
ground.
     "You big bastard!" shouted Sannosuke, already on his feet and attacking
     again.
     Musashi caught him by the waist and held him up in the air. "Had enough?"
     "No!" he shouted defiantly, though the sun was in his eyes and he was
     reduced to uselessly waving his arms and legs.
     "I'm going to throw you against that rock over there. It'll kill you. Ready to
     give up?"
     "No!"
     "Stubborn, aren't you? Can't you see you're beaten?"
     "Not as long as I'm alive I'm not! You'll see. I'll win in the end." "How do
     you expect to do that?"
     "I'll practice, I'll discipline myself."
      "But while you're practicing for ten years, I'll be doing the same thing."
"Yes, but you're a lot older than I am. You'll die first."
      "Hmm."
      "And when they put you in a coffin, I'll strike the final blow and win!"
"Fool!" shouted Musashi, tossing the boy to the ground.
      When Sannosuke stood up, Musashi looked at his face for a moment,
laughed and clapped his hands together once. "Good. You can be my pupil."
