The Flies


       On the east bank of the Sumida River where the road from Shimōsa
converged with a branch of the Ōshū highroad rose a great barrier with an
imposing gate, ample evidence of the firm rule of Aoyama Tadanari, the new
magistrate of Edo.
       Musashi stood in line, idly waiting his turn, Iori at his side. When he had
passed through Edo three years earlier, entering and leaving the city had been a
simple matter. Even at this distance, he could see that there were far more houses
than before, fewer open spaces.
       "You there, rōnin. You're next."
       Two officials in leather hakama began frisking Musashi with great
thoroughness, while a third glared at him and asked questions.
      "What business do you have in the capital?"
      "Nothing specific."
      "No special business, eh?"
       "Well, I'm a shugyōsha. I suppose it could be said that studying to be a
samurai is my business."
      The man was silent. Musashi grinned.
      "Where were you born?"
      "In the village of Miyamoto, district of Yoshino, Mimasaka Province."
      "Your master?"
      "I have none."
      "Who furnishes your travel money?"
       "No one. I carve statues and draw pictures. Sometimes I can exchange
them for food and lodging. Often I stay at temples. Occasionally I give lessons in
the sword. One way or another, I manage."
       "Where are you coming from?"
       "For the past two years, I've been farming in Hōtengahara in Shimōsa. I
decided I didn't want to do that for the rest of my life, so I've come here."
       "Do you have a place to stay in Edo? No one can enter the city unless he
has relatives or a place to live."
       "Yes," replied Musashi on the spur of the moment. He saw that if he tried
to stick to the truth, there was going to be no end to it.

     "Well?"
     "Yagyū Munenori, Lord of Tajima."
     The official's mouth dropped open.
       Musashi, amused at the man's reaction, congratulated himself. The risk of
being caught in a lie did not trouble him greatly. He felt that the Yagyūs must
have heard about him from Takuan. It seemed unlikely they would deny all
acquaintance with him if questioned. It might even be that Takuan was in Edo
now. If so, Musashi had his means of introduction. It was too late to have a bout
with Sekishūsai, but he longed to have one with Munenori, his father's successor
in the Yagyū Style and a personal tutor of the shōgun.
       The name acted like magic. "Well, well," said the official amiably. "If
you're connected with the House of Yagyū, I'm sorry to have troubled you. As
you must realize, there are all sorts of samurai on the road. We have to be
particularly careful about anyone who appears to be a rōnin. Orders, you know."
After a few more questions for the sake of form or face, he said, "You can go
now," and personally escorted Musashi to the gate.
       "Sir," Iori asked when they were on the other side, "why are they so
careful about rōnin and nobody else?"
       "They're on the lookout for enemy spies."
       "What spy would be stupid enough to come here looking like a rōnin? The
officials are pretty dumb—them and their stupid questions! They made us miss
the ferry!"
       "Shh. They'll hear you. Don't worry about the ferry. You can look at Mount
Fuji while we're waiting for the next one. Did you know you could see it from
here?"
     "So what? We could see it from Hōtengahara too."
     "Yes, but it's different here."
     "How?"
     "Fuji's never the same. It varies from day to day, hour to hour." "Looks the
     same to me."
       "It's not, though. It changes—time, weather, season, the place you're
looking at it from. It differs, too, according to the person who's looking at it,
according to his heart."
     Unimpressed, Iori picked up a flat stone and sent it skimming across the
     water. After amusing himself in this fashion for a few minutes, he came
     back
     to Musashi and asked, "Are we really going to Lord Yagyū's house?" "I'll

      have to think about that."
      "Isn't that what you told the guard?"
       "Yes. I intend to go, but it's not all that simple. He's a daimyō, you know."
"He must be awfully important. That's what I want to be when I grow up."
"Important?"
      "Umm."
      "You shouldn't aim so low."
      "What do you mean?"
      "Look at Mount Fuji."
      "I'll never be like Mount Fuji."
       "Instead of wanting to be like this or that, make yourself into a silent,
immovable giant. That's what the mountain is. Don't waste your time trying to
impress people. If you become the sort of man people can respect, they'll respect
you, without your doing anything."
       Musashi's words didn't have time to sink in, for just then Iori shouted,
"Look, here comes the ferry," and ran ahead to be the first one on board.
       The Sumida River was a study in contrasts, wide in places, narrow in
others, shallow here and deep there. At high tide, the waves washing the banks
took on a muddy hue. Sometimes the estuary swelled to twice its normal width.
At the point where the ferry crossed, it was virtually an inlet of the bay.
       The sky was clear, the water transparent. Looking over the side, Iori could
see schools of countless tiny fish racing about. Among the rocks he also spotted
the rusty remains of an old helmet. He had no ears for the conversation going on
around him.
       "What do you think? Is it going to stay peaceful, the way it is now?" "I
doubt it."
       "You're probably right. Sooner or later, there'll be fighting. I hope not, but
what else can you expect?"
       Other passengers kept their thoughts to themselves and stared dourly at the
water, afraid an official, possibly in disguise, might overhear and connect them
with the speakers. Those who did take the risk seemed to enjoy flirting with the
ubiquitous eyes and ears of the law.
       "You can tell from the way they're checking everybody that we're heading
for war. It's only very recently they've been clamping down like that. And
there're a lot of rumors about spies from Osaka."
       "You also hear about burglars breaking into daimyō's houses, though they
try to hush it up. It must be embarrassing being robbed when you're supposed to

be the enforcers of law and order."
       "You'd have to be after more than money to take that kind of risk. It's got
to be spies. No ordinary crook would have the nerve."
       As he looked around, it occurred to Musashi that the ferry was transporting
a fair cross section of Edo society. A lumberman with sawdust clinging to his
work clothes, a couple of cheap geisha who might have come from Kyoto, a
broad-shouldered roughneck or two, a group of well-diggers, two openly
coquettish whores, a priest, a beggar monk, another rōnin like himself.
       When the boat reached the Edo side and they all piled out, a short,
heavyset man called to Musashi, "Hey, you. The rōnin. You forgot something."
He held out a reddish brocade pouch, so old that the dirt seemed to shine more
brightly than the few gold threads left in it.
       Musashi, shaking his head, said, "It's not mine. It must belong to one of the
other passengers."
       Iori piped up, "It's mine," snatched the pouch from the man's hand and
stuffed it into his kimono.
       The man was indignant. "What're you doing, grabbing like that! Give it
here! Then you're going to bow three times before you get it back. If you don't,
you're going to get thrown in the river!"
      Musashi intervened, asking the man to excuse Iori's rudeness because of his
      age.
      "What are you?" the man asked roughly. "Brother? Master? What's your
      name!"
      "Miyamoto Musashi."
       "What!" exclaimed the ruffian, staring hard at Musashi's face. After a
moment he said to Iori, "You'd better be more careful from now on." Then, as
though eager to escape, he turned away.
      "Just a moment," said Musashi. The gentleness of his tone took the man
      completely by surprise.
      He whirled around, his hand going to his sword. "What do you want?"
      "What's your name?"
      "What's it to you?"
       "You asked mine. As a matter of courtesy, you should tell me yours." "I'm
one of Hangawara's men. My name's Jūrō."
       "All right. You can go," said Musashi, pushing him away.
       "I won't forget that!" Jūrō stumbled a few steps before he found his feet
and fled.

       "Serves him right, the coward," said Iori. Satisfied that he'd been
vindicated, he looked up worshipfully at Musashi's face and moved closer to
him.
       As they walked into the city, Musashi said, "Iori, you have to realize that
living here is not like being out in the country. There, we had only foxes and
squirrels for neighbors. Here, there're lots of people. You'll have to be more
careful about your manners."
       "Yes, sir."
       "When people live together in harmony, the earth is a paradise," Musashi
went on gravely. "But every man has a bad side as well as a good side. There are
times when only the bad comes out. Then the world's not paradise, but hell. Do
you understand what I'm saying?"
       "Yes, I think so," said Iori, more subdued now.
       "There's a reason we have manners and etiquette. They keep us from
letting the bad side take over. This promotes social order, which is the objective
of the government's laws." Musashi paused. "The way you acted ... It was a
trivial matter, but your attitude couldn't help but make the man angry. I'm not at
all happy about it."
      "Yes, sir."
      "I don't know where we'll be going from here. But wherever we are, you'd
      better follow the rules and act courteously."
      The boy bobbed his head a couple of times and made a small, stiff bow.
      They walked on in silence for a short while.
       "Sir, would you carry my pouch for me? I don't want to lose it again."
Accepting the small brocade bag, Musashi inspected it closely before tucking it
into his kimono. "Is this the one your father left you?"
       "Yes, sir. I got it back from the Tokuganji at the beginning of the year. The
priest didn't take any of the money. You can use some of it if you need to."
"Thanks," Musashi said lightly. "I'll take good care of it."
       "He has a talent I don't have," mused Musashi, thinking ruefully of his
own indifference to personal finances. The boy's innate prudence had taught
Musashi the meaning of economics. He appreciated the boy's trust and was
growing fonder of him by the day. He looked forward with enthusiasm to the
task of helping him develop his native intelligence.
       "Where would you like to stay tonight?" he asked.
       Iori, who had been looking at his new surroundings with great curiosity,
remarked, "I see lots of horses over there. It looks like a marketplace, right here

in town." He spoke as though he had run across a long-lost friend in a strange
country.
       They had reached Bakurōchō, where there was a large and diverse
selection of tea shops and hostelries catering to the equine professions—sellers,
buyers, draymen, grooms, a variety of lesser factotums. Men in small groups
haggled and babbled in a welter of dialects, the most prominent being the tangy,
irate-sounding speech of Edo.
       Among the rabble was a well-groomed samurai, searching for good horses.
With a disgruntled look, he said, "Let's go home. There's nothing here but nags,
nothing worth recommending to his lordship."
       Striding briskly between the animals, he came face to face with Musashi,
blinked, and stepped back in surprise. "You're Miyamoto Musashi, aren't you?"
       Musashi looked at the man for an instant, then broke into a grin. It was
Kimura Sukekurō. Although the two men had come within inches of locking
swords at Koyagyū Castle, Sukekurō's manner was cordial. He seemed to bear
no lingering rancor from that encounter.
       "I certainly didn't expect to see you here," he said. "Have you been in Edo
long?"
       "I've just come from Shimōsa," replied Musashi. "How's your master? Is
he still in good health?"
       "Yes, thank you, but of course at Sekishūsai's age ... I'm staying with Lord
Munenori. You must come to visit; I'd be glad to introduce you. Oh, there's
something else, too." He flashed a meaningful look and smiled. "We have a
beautiful treasure that belongs to you. You must come as soon as you can."
       Before Musashi could inquire what the "beautiful treasure" might be,
Sukekurō made a slight bow and walked rapidly away, his attendant trailing
along behind.


      The guests staying at the inexpensive inns of Bakurōchō were mostly
horse traders in from the provinces. Musashi decided to take a room there rather
than in another part of town, where the rates would most likely be higher. Like
the other inns, the one he chose had a large stable, so large in fact that the rooms
themselves seemed rather like an annex. But after the rigors of Hōtengahara,
even this third-rate hostelry seemed luxurious.
      Despite his feeling of well-being, Musashi found the horseflies annoying
and began grumbling.

       The proprietress heard him. "I'll change your room," she offered
solicitously. "The flies aren't so bad on the second floor."
       Once resettled, Musashi found himself exposed to the full strength of the
western sun and felt like grumbling again. Only a few days ago, the afternoon
sun would have been a source of cheer, a bright ray of hope shedding nourishing
warmth on the rice plants and portending good weather for the morrow. As for
the flies, when his sweat had attracted them while he worked in the fields, he had
taken the view that they were only going about their chores, just as he was going
about his. He had even regarded them as fellow creatures. Now, having crossed
one wide river and entered the maze of the city, he found the heat of the sun
anything but comforting, the flies only an irritation.
       His appetite took his mind off the inconveniences. He glanced at Iori and
saw symptoms of lassitude and gluttony in his face too. Small wonder, for a
party in the next room had ordered a great pot of steaming food and was now
attacking it ravenously, amid much talk, laughter and drinking.
       Buckwheat noodles—soba—that's what he wanted! In the country, if a
man wanted soba, he planted buckwheat in the early spring, watched it flower in
the summer, dried the grain in the fall, ground the flour in the winter. Then he
could make soba. Here it required no more effort than clapping one's hands for
service.
       "Iori, shall we order some soba?"
       "Yes," came the eager reply.
       The proprietress came and took their order. While they waited, Musashi
propped his elbows on the windowsill and shaded his eyes. Diagonally across
the way was a signboard reading: "Souls polished here. Zushino Kōsuke, Master
in the Hon'ami Style."
       Iori had noticed it too. After staring for a moment in bewilderment, he
said, "That sign says 'Souls polished.' What sort of business is that?"
       "Well, it also says the man works in the Hon'ami Style, so I suppose he's a
sword polisher. Come to think of it, I ought to have my sword worked on."
       The soba was slow to arrive, so Musashi stretched out on the tatami for a
nap. But the voices in the next room had risen several decibels and become
quarrelsome. "Iori," he said, opening one eye, "will you ask the people next door
to be a little quieter?"
       Only shoji separated the two rooms, but instead of opening them, Iori went
out into the hall. The door to the other room was open. "Don't make so much
noise," he shouted. "My teacher's trying to sleep."

      "Hunk!" The squabble came to an abrupt halt. The men turned and stared
      angrily at him.
      "You say something, shrimp?"
      Pouting at the epithet, Iori said, "We came upstairs because of the flies.
      Now you're yelling so much he can't rest."
      "Is this your idea, or did your master send you?"
      "He sent me."
       "Did he? Well, I'm not wasting my time talking to a little turd like you. Go
tell your master Kumagorō of Chichibu will give him his answer later. Now beat
it!"
       Kumagorō was a great brute of a man, and the two or three others in the
room were not much smaller. Cowed by the menace in their eyes, Iori quickly
retreated. Musashi had dropped off to sleep; not wanting to disturb him, Iori sat
down by the window.
       Presently, one of the horse traders opened the shoji a crack and peeked in
at Musashi. There followed much laughter, accompanied by loud and insulting
remarks.
       "Who does he think he is, butting into our party? Dumb rōnin! No telling
where he comes from. Just barges in and starts acting like he owns the place."
"We'll have to show him what's what."
       "Yeah, we'll make sure he knows what the horse traders of Edo are made
of."
       "Talking's not going to show him. Let's haul him out back and throw a
bucket of horse piss in his face."
       Kumagorō spoke up. "Hold on, now. Let me handle this. Either I'll get an
apology in writing or we'll wash his face with horse piss. Enjoy your sake. Leave
everything to me."
       "This should be good," said one man, as Kumagorō, with a confident
smirk, tightened his obi.
       "I beg your pardon," said Kumagorō, sliding the shoji open. Without
standing up, he shuffled into Musashi's room on his knees.
       The soba, six helpings in a lacquered box, had finally arrived. Musashi
was sitting up now, addressing his chopsticks to his first helping.
       "Look, they're coming in," said Iori under his breath, moving slightly to
get out of the way.
       Kumagorō seated himself behind and to Iori's left, legs crossed, elbows
resting on his knees. With a fierce scowl, he said, "You can eat later. Don't try to

hide the fact that you're scared by sitting there playing with your food."
       Though he was grinning, Musashi gave no indication that he was listening.
He stirred the soba with his chopsticks to separate the strands, lifted a mouthful
and swallowed with a joyous slurp.
       The veins in Kumagorō's forehead nearly popped. "Put that bowl down,"
he said angrily.
       "And who are you?" Musashi asked mildly, making no move to comply.
"You don't know who I am? The only people in Bakurōchō who haven't heard
my name are good-for-nothings and deaf-mutes."
       "I'm a little hard of hearing myself. Speak up, tell me who you are and
where you come from."
       "I'm Kumagorō from Chichibu, the best horse trader in Edo. When
children see me coming, they get so scared they can't even cry."
     "I see. Then you're in the horse business?"
     "You bet I am. I sell to the samurai. You'd better remember that when you're
     dealing with me."
     "In what way am I dealing with you?"
       "You sent that runt there to complain about the noise. Where do you think
you are? This is no fancy inn for daimyō, nice and quiet and all. We horse
traders like noise."
       "I gathered that."
       "Then why were you trying to bust up our party? I demand an apology."
"Apology?"
       "Yes, in writing. You can address it to Kumagorō and his friends. If we
don't get one we'll take you outside and teach you a thing or two." "What you
say is interesting."
       "Hunk!"
       "I mean your way of speaking is interesting."
       "Cut out the nonsense! Do we get the apology or don't we? Well?"
Kumagorō's voice had gone from a growl to a roar, and the sweat on his crimson
forehead glistened in the evening sun. Looking ready to explode, he bared his
hairy chest and took a dagger from his stomach wrapper.
       "Make up your mind! If I don't hear your answer soon, you're in big
trouble." He uncrossed his legs and held the dagger vertically beside the
lacquered box, its point touching the floor.
       Musashi, restraining his mirth, said, "Well, now how should I respond to
that?"

       Lowering his bowl, he reached out with his chopsticks, removed a dark
speck from the soba in the box and threw it out the window. Still silent, he
reached out again and picked off another dark speck, then another.
       Kumagorō's eyes bugged; his breath halted.
       "There's no end to them, is there?" remarked Musashi casually. "Here, Iori,
go give these chopsticks a good washing."
       As Iori went out, Kumagorō faded silently back into his own room and in a
hushed voice told his companions of the incredible sight he had just witnessed.
After first mistaking the black spots on the soba for dirt, he had realized they
were live flies, plucked so deftly they had had no time to escape. Within
minutes, he and his fellows transferred their little party to a more remote quarter,
and silence reigned.
       "That's better, isn't it?" said Musashi to Iori. The two of them grinned at
one another.
       By the time they'd finished their meal, the sun was down, and the moon
was shining wanly above the roof of the "soul polisher's" shop.
       Musashi stood up and straightened his kimono. "I think I'll see about
having my sword taken care of," he said.
       He picked up the weapon and was about to leave when the proprietress
came halfway up the blackened staircase and called, "A letter's come for you."
       Puzzled that anyone should know his whereabouts so soon, Musashi went
down, accepted the missive and asked, "Is the messenger still here?"
       "No; he left immediately."
       The outside of the letter bore only the word "Suke," which Musashi took to
stand for Kimura Sukekurō. Unfolding it, he read: "I informed Lord Munenori
that I saw you this morning. He seemed happy to receive word of you after all
this time. He instructed me to write and ask when you will be able to visit us."
       Musashi descended the remaining steps and went to the office, where he
borrowed ink and brush. Seating himself in a corner, he wrote on the back of
Sukekurō's letter: "I shall be happy to visit Lord Munenori whenever he wishes
to have a bout with me. As a warrior, I have no other purpose in calling on him."
He signed the note "Masana," a formal name he seldom used.
      "Iori," he called from the bottom of the stairs. "I want you to run an errand
      for me."
      "Yes, sir."
      "I want you to deliver a letter to Lord Yagyū Munenori."
      "Yes, sir."

       According to the proprietress, everybody knew where Lord Munenori
lived, but she offered directions anyway. "Go down the main street until you
come to the highroad. Go straight along that as far as Nihombashi. Then bear to
the left and go along the river until you get to Kobikichō. That's where it is; you
can't miss it."
       "Thanks," said Iori, who already had his sandals on. "I'm sure I can find
it." He was delighted at the opportunity to go out, particularly since his
destination was the home of an important daimyō. Giving no thought to the hour,
he walked away quickly, swinging his arms and holding his head up proudly.
       As Musashi watched him turn the corner, he thought: "He's a little too self-
confident for his own good."
