The Owl


       When they finally forsook the teahouse, Kojirō was barely able to stand.
"Shoulder ... shoulder," he gurgled, grabbing onto both Jūrō and Koroku for
support.
      The three lumbered uncertainly down the dark, deserted street. Jūrō said,
      "Sir, I told you we should spend the night."
      "In that dive? Not on your life! I'd rather go back to the Sumiya." "I
      wouldn't, sir."
      "Why not?"
       "That girl, she ran away from you. If they find her, she could be forced to
go to bed with you, but for what? You wouldn't enjoy it then."
      "Umm. Maybe you're right."
      "Do you want her?"
      "Nah."
      "But you can't quite get her out of your mind, can you?"
      "I've never fallen in love in my life. I'm not the type. I've got more
      important things to do."
      "What, sir?"
       "Obvious, my boy. I'm going to be the best, most famous swordsman ever,
and the quickest way to do that is to be the shōgun's teacher."
       "But he already has the House of Yagyū to teach him. And I hear he
recently hired Ono Jirōemon."
       "Ono Jirōemon! Who gives a fart about him? The Yagyūs don't impress me
much either. You watch me. One of these days . . ."
       They had reached the stretch of road along which the new moat was being
dug, and soft dirt was piled halfway up the willow trees.
       "Watch out, sir; it's very slippery," said Jūrō as he and Koroku tried to help
their teacher down from the pile of dirt.
       "Hold it!" Kojirō shouted, abruptly shoving the two men away. He slid
rapidly down the dirt pile. "Who's there?"
      The man who had just lunged at Kojirō's back lost his balance and tumbled
      headfirst into the moat.
      "Have you forgotten, Sasaki?"

     "You killed four of our comrades!"
      Kojirō jumped to the top of the dirt pile, from where he could see that
there were at least ten men among the trees, partly hidden by rushes. Swords
pointed at him, they slowly began closing in.
      "So you're from the Obata School, are you?" he said in a contemptuous
tone. The sudden action had sobered him completely. "Last time, you lost four
men out of five. How many of you came tonight? How many want to die? Just
give me the number, and I'll oblige. Cowards! Attack if you dare!" His hand
went deftly over his shoulder to the hilt of the Drying Pole.


       Obata Nichijō, before taking the tonsure, had been one of the most
celebrated warriors in Kai, a province famous for its heroic samurai. After the
defeat of the House of Takeda by Tokugawa Ieyasu, the Obata family had lived
in obscurity until Kagenori distinguished himself at the Battle of Sekigahara. He
had subsequently been summoned into service by Ieyasu himself and had gained
fame as a teacher of military science. He had, however, refused the shogunate's
offer of a choice plot of land in central Edo with the plea that a country warrior
like himself would feel out of place there. He preferred a wooded lot adjoining
Hirakawa Tenjin Shrine, where he had established his school in an ancient
thatched farmhouse to which had been added a new lecture hall and a rather
imposing entrance.
       Now advanced in years and suffering from a neural disorder, Kagenori had
been confined to his sickroom in recent months, appearing only rarely in the
lecture hall. The woods were full of owls, and he had taken to signing his name
as "Old Man Owl." Sometimes he'd smile weakly and say, "I'm an owl, like the
others."
       Not infrequently, the pain from the waist up was agonizing. Tonight had
been one of those times.
       "Feel a little better? Would you like some water?" The speaker was Hōjō
Shinzō, son of Hōjō Ujikatsu, the celebrated military strategist.
       "I'm much more comfortable now," said Kagenori. "Why don't you go to
bed? It'll soon be light." The invalid's hair was white, his frame as skinny and
angular as an aged plum tree.
       "Don't worry about me. I get plenty of sleep during the day."
       "You can't have much time left for sleeping when you spend your days
taking over my lectures. You're the only one who can do that."

       "Sleeping too much isn't good discipline."
       Noticing that the lamp was about to go out, Shinzō stopped rubbing the old
man's back and went to fetch some oil. When he returned, Kagenori, still lying
on his stomach, had raised his bony face from the pillow. The light was reflected
eerily in his eyes.
      "What is it, sir?"
      "Don't you hear it? It sounds like splashing water."
      "It seems to be coming from the well."
      "Who would it be at this hour? Do you suppose some of the men have been
      out drinking again?"
      "That's probably it, but I'll take a look anyhow."
      "Give them a good scolding while you're at it."
      "Yes, sir. You'd better go to sleep. You must be tired."
       When Kagenori's pain had subsided and he had dropped off to sleep,
Shinzō carefully tucked the covers up around his shoulders and went to the back
door. Two students were leaning over the well bucket, washing blood off their
faces and hands.
       He ran toward them with a scowl on his face. "You went, didn't you?" he
said curtly. "After I pleaded with you not to!" The exasperation in his voice
faded when he saw a third man lying in the shadow of the well. From the way he
was groaning, it sounded as if he might die from his wounds at any moment.
       Like little boys begging for help from an older brother, both men, their
faces oddly twisted, sobbed uncontrollably.
       "Fools!" Shinzō had to restrain himself from giving them a thrashing.
"How many times did I warn you you were no match for him? Why didn't you
listen?"
       "After he dragged our master's name through the mud? After he killed four
of our men? You keep saying we're not being reasonable. Aren't you the one
who's lost his reason? Controlling your temper, holding yourself back, bearing
insults in silence! Is that what you call reasonable? That's not the Way of the
Samurai."
       "Isn't it? If confronting Sasaki Kojirō was the thing to do, I'd have
challenged him myself. He went out of his way to insult our teacher and commit
other outrages against us, but that's no excuse for losing our sense of proportion.
I'm not afraid to die, but Kojirō is not worth risking my life or anybody else's
over."
       "That's not the way most people see it. They think we're afraid of him.

Afraid to stand up for our honor. Kojirō's been maligning Kagenori all over
Edo."
       "If he wants to run off at the mouth, let him. Do you think anybody who
knows Kagenori is going to believe he lost an argument to that conceited
novice?"
      "Do as you please, Shinzō. The rest of us are not going to sit by and do
      nothing."
      "Just exactly what do you have in mind?"
      "Only one thing. Kill him!"
       "You think you can? I told you not to go to the Sensōji. You wouldn't
listen. Four men died. You've just returned after being defeated by him again.
Isn't that piling shame on dishonor? It's not Kojirō who's destroying Kagenori's
reputation, it's you. I have one question. Did you kill him?"
       There was no answer.
       "Of course not. I'll bet anything he doesn't have a scratch on him. The
trouble with you is you don't have enough sense to avoid meeting him on his
own terms. You don't understand his strength. True, he's young, he's of low
character, he's coarse, he's arrogant. But he's an outstanding swordsman. How he
learned his skill, I don't know, but there's no denying he has it. You
underestimate him. That's your first mistake."
       One man pressed in on Shinzō as though ready to attack him physically.
"You're saying that whatever the bastard does, there's nothing we can do about
it."
       Shinzō nodded defiantly. "Exactly. There's nothing we can do. We're not
       swordsmen; we're students of military science. If you think my attitude is
       cowardly, then I'll just have to put up with being called a coward." The
wounded man at their feet moaned. "Water ... water ... please." His two comrades
knelt and propped him into a sitting position.
       Seeing they were about to give him some water, Shinzō cried in alarm,
       "Stop! If he drinks water, it'll kill him!"
       As they hesitated, the man put his mouth to the bucket. One swallow and
his head collapsed into it, bringing the night's death toll to five.
       While the owls hooted at the morning moon, Shinzō silently returned to
the sickroom. Kagenori was still asleep, breathing deeply. Reassured, Shinzō
went to his own cubicle.
       Works on military science lay open on his desk, books he had begun
reading but had had no time to finish. Though well born, as a child he had done

his share of splitting firewood, carrying water and studying long hours by
candlelight. His father, a great samurai, did not believe that young men of his
class should be pampered. Shinzō had entered the Obata School with the
ultimate aim of strengthening military skills in his family's fief, and though one
of the younger students, he ranked highest in his teacher's estimation.
       These days, caring for his ailing master kept him awake most of the night.
He sat now with his arms folded and heaved a deep sigh. Who would look after
Kagenori if he were not there? All the other students living at the school were of
an uncouth type typically attracted to military matters. The men who came to the
school only for classes were even worse. They blustered about, voicing opinions
on the masculine subjects that samurai habitually discussed; none of them really
understood the spirit of the lonely man of reason who was their teacher. The
finer points of military science went over their heads. Far more comprehensible
was any kind of slur, either real or fancied, against their pride or their ability as
samurai. Insulted, they became mindless instruments of vengeance.
       Shinzō had been away on a trip when Kojirō arrived at the school. Since
Kojirō had claimed that he wanted to ask some questions about military
textbooks, his interest seemed genuine and he had been introduced to the master.
But then, without asking a single question, he began arguing with Kagenori
presumptuously and arrogantly, which suggested that his real purpose was to
humiliate the old man. When some students finally got him into another room
and demanded an explanation, he reacted with a flood of invective and an offer
to fight any of them at any time.
       Kojirō had then spread allegations that Obata's military studies were
superficial, that they were no more than a rehash of the Kusunoki Style or the
ancient Chinese military text known as the Six Secrets, and that they were
spurious and unreliable. When his malicious pronouncements got back to the
ears of the students, they vowed to make him pay with his life.
       Shinzō's opposition—the problem was trivial, their master ought not to be
disturbed by matters of this sort, Kojirō was not a serious student of military
science—had proved futile, though he had also pointed out that before any
decisive step was taken, Kagenori's son Yogorō, who was away on a long
journey, should be consulted.
       "Can't they see how much useless trouble they're causing?" lamented
Shinzō. The fading light of the lamp dimly illuminated his troubled face. Still
racking his brain for a solution, he laid his arms across the open books and dozed
off.

       He awoke to the murmur of indistinct voices.
       Going first to the lecture hall and finding it empty, he slipped on a pair of
zōri and went outside. In a bamboo grove that was part of the sacred cornpound
of the Hirakawa Tenjin Shrine, he saw what he had expected: a large group of
students holding an emotion-charged council of war. The two wounded men,
their faces ashen, their arms suspended in white slings, stood side by side,
describing the night's disaster.
      One man asked indignantly, "Are you saying ten of you went and half were
      killed by this one man?"
      "I'm afraid so. We couldn't even get close to him."
      "Murata and Ayabe were supposed to be our best swordsmen."
       "They were the first to go. Yosobei managed by sheer guts to get back
here, but he made the mistake of drinking some water before we could stop
him."
       A grim silence descended over the group. As students of military science,
they were concerned with problems of logistics, strategy, communications,
intelligence and so on, not with the techniques of hand-to-hand combat. Most of
them believed, as they had been taught, that swordsmanship was a matter for
ordinary soldiers, not generals. Yet their samurai pride stood in the way of their
accepting the logical corollary, which was that they were helpless against an
expert swordsman like Sasaki Kojirō.
      "What can we do?" asked a mournful voice. For a time the only answer was
      the hooting of the owls.
      Then one student said brightly, "I have a cousin in the House of Yagyū.
      Maybe through him we could get them to help us."
      "Don't be stupid!" shouted several others.
      "We can't ask for outside help. It'd only bring more shame on our teacher.
      It'd be an admission of weakness."
      "Well, what can we do?"
       "The only way is to confront Kojirō again. But if we do it on a dark road
again, it'll only do more damage to the school's reputation. If we die in open
battle, we die. At least we won't be thought of as cowards."
       "Should we send him a formal challenge?"
       "Yes, and we have to keep at it, no matter how many times we lose." "I
think you're right, but Shinzō isn't going to like this."
       "He doesn't have to know about it, nor does our master. Remember that, all
of you. We can borrow brush and ink from the priest."

       They started quietly for the priest's house. Before they had gone ten paces,
the man in the lead gasped and stepped back. The others instantly came to a dead
halt, their eyes riveted on the back veranda of the timeworn shrine building.
There, against a backdrop formed by the shadow of a plum tree laden with green
fruit, stood Kojirō, one foot propped on the railing and a malevolent grin on his
face. To a man, the students turned pale; some had trouble breathing.
       Kojirō's voice was venomous. "I gather from your discussion that you still
haven't learned, that you've decided to write a letter of challenge and have it
delivered to me. Well, I've saved you the trouble. I'm here, ready to fight.
       "Last night, before I'd even washed the blood off my hands, I came to the
conclusion there'd be a sequel, so I followed you sniveling cowards home."
       He paused to let this sink in, then continued in an ironic tone. "I was
wondering how you decide on the time and place to challenge an enemy. Do you
consult a horoscope to pick the most propitious day? Or do you consider it wiser
not to draw your swords until there comes a dark night when your opponent is
drunk and on his way home from the licensed quarter?"
       He paused again, as though waiting for an answer.
       "Have you nothing to say? Isn't there a single red-blooded man among
you? If you're so eager to fight me, come on. One at a time, or all at once—it's
all the same to me! I wouldn't run from the likes of you if you were in full armor
and marching to the beat of drums!"
       No sound came from the cowed men.
       "What's the matter with you?" The pauses grew longer. "Have you decided
not to challenge me? ... Isn't there even one among you with some backbone?
"All right, it's time now to open your stupid ears and listen.
       "I am Sasaki Kojirō. I learned the art of the sword indirectly from the great
Toda Seigen after his death. I know the secrets of unsheathing invented by
Katayama Hisayasu, and I have myself created the Ganryū Style. I'm not like
those who deal in theory, who read books and listen to lectures on Sun-tzu or the
Six Secrets. In spirit, in will, you and I have nothing in common.
       "I don't know the details of your daily study, but I'm showing you now
what the science of fighting is all about in real life. I'm not bragging. Think!
When a man is set upon in the dark as I was last night, if he has the good fortune
to win, what does he do? If he's an ordinary man, he goes as quickly as he can to
a safe place. Once there, he thinks back over the incident and congratulates
himself on having survived. Isn't that right? Isn't that what you would do?
       "But did I do that? No! Not only did I cut down half of your men, I

followed the stragglers home and waited here, right under your noses. I listened
while you tried to make up your weak minds, and I took you completely by
surprise. If I wanted to, I could attack now and smash you to bits. That's what it
means to be a military man! That's the secret of military science!
       "Some of you have said Sasaki Kojirō is just a swordsman, that he had no
business coming to a military school and shooting off his mouth. How far do I
have to go to convince you how wrong you are? Perhaps today I'll also prove to
you that I'm not only the greatest swordsman in the country but also a master of
tactics!
       "Ha, ha! This is turning into quite a little lecture, isn't it? I'm afraid if I
continue to pour out my fund of knowledge, poor Obata Kagenori may find
himself out of a stipend. That wouldn't do, would it?
      "Oh, I'm thirsty, Koroku! Jūrō! Get me some water!"
      "Right away, sir!" they replied in unison from beside the shrine, where they
      had been watching in rapt admiration.
      Having brought him a large earthen cup of water, Jūrō asked eagerly, "What
      are you going to do, sir?"
       "Ask them!" Kojirō sneered. "Your answer's in those weasely, empty
faces." "Did you ever see men look so stupid?" Koroku laughed.
       "What a gutless bunch," said Jūrō. "Come on, sir, let's go. They're not
going to stand up to you."
       While the three of them swaggered through the shrine gate, Shinzō,
concealed among the trees, muttered through clenched teeth, "I'll get you for
this."
       The students were despondent. Kojirō had outwitted and defeated them;
then he'd gloated, leaving them frightened and humiliated.
       The silence was broken by a student running up and asking in a bewildered
tone, "Did we order coffins?" When no one replied, he said, "The coffin-maker's
just arrived with five coffins. He's waiting."
       Finally, one of the group answered dispiritedly, "The bodies have been sent
for. They haven't arrived yet. I'm not sure, but I think we'll need one more coffin.
Ask him to make it, and put the ones he brought in the storehouse."
       That night a wake was held in the lecture hall. Though everything was
done quietly, in the hope that Kagenori would not hear, he was able to guess
more or less what had occurred. He refrained from asking questions, nor did
Shinzō make any comment.
       From that day, the stigma of defeat hung over the school. Only Shinzō,

who had urged restraint and been accused of cowardice, kept alive the desire for
revenge. His eyes harbored a glint that none of the others could fathom.
      In early fall, Kagenori's illness worsened. Visible from his bedside was an
owl perched on a limb of a large zelkova tree, staring, never moving, hooting at
the moon in the daytime. Shinzō now heard in the owl's hoot the message that
his master's end was near.
      Then a letter arrived from Yogorō, saying he had heard about Kojirō and
was on his way home. For the next few days, Shinzō wondered which would
come first, the arrival of the son or the death of the father. In either case, the day
for which he was waiting, the day of his release from his obligations, was at
hand.
      On the evening before Yogorō was expected, Shinzō left a farewell letter
on his desk and took his leave of the Obata School. From the woods near the
shrine, he faced Kagenori's sickroom and said softly, "Forgive me for leaving
without your permission. Rest at ease, good master. Yogorō will be home
tomorrow. I don't know if I can present Kojirō's head to you before you die, but I
must try. If I should die trying, I shall await you in the land of the dead."
