The Warrior of Kiso


      Musashi had not run very far when a traveler called to him, "Hey, weren't
you with a young woman and a boy before?"
      Musashi stopped abruptly. "Yes," he said with sinking heart. "Has
something happened to them?"
      Apparently he was about the only person who had not heard the story that
was fast becoming common gossip along the highroad. A young man had
approached the girl ... kidnapped her. He had been seen whipping the cow .. .
driving her down a side road near the barrier. The traveler had barely finished
repeating the tale before Musashi was on his way.
      Racing at top speed, he still took an hour to reach the barrier, which had
closed at six, and with it the tea shops on either side. Looking rather frantic,
Musashi approached an old man who was piling up stools in front of his shop.
     "What's the matter, sir? Forget something?"
     "No. I'm looking for a young woman and a boy who passed here a few
     hours ago."
     "Would that be the girl who looked like Fugen on a cow?"
      "That's the one!" Musashi answered without thinking. "I'm told a rōnin
took her off somewhere. Do you know which way they went?"
      "I didn't actually see the incident myself, but I heard they left the main
road at the head-burying mound. That'd take them toward Nobu Pond."
      For the life of him, Musashi had no idea who might have kidnapped Otsū
or why. Matahachi's name never entered his mind. He imagined it might be a
good-for-nothing rōnin, like the ones he had encountered in Nara. Or perhaps
one of the freebooters reputed to be hanging out in the woods hereabouts. He
only hoped it was a petty crook, rather than one of the hoodlums who made a
business of abducting and selling women and were known to be vicious on
occasion.
      He ran on and on in his search for Nobu Pond. After the sun went down,
he could hardly see a foot ahead, though the stars were bright above. The road
began to slope upward; he assumed he was entering the foothills of Mount
Koma.
      Having seen nothing resembling a pond and fearing he was on the wrong

road, he stopped and looked around. In the vast sea of blackness, he was able to
make out a lone farmhouse, a windbreak of trees, and looming darkly above
these, the mountain.
       When he got closer, he saw that the house was large and sturdily built,
though moss grew on the thatched roof and the thatch itself was rotting. There
was a light outside—whether torch or fire, he couldn't tell—and near the kitchen,
a spotted cow. He was sure it was the animal Otsū had been riding.
       He approached stealthily, keeping to the shadows. When he was close
enough to see into the kitchen, he heard a loud male voice coming from a shed
on the other side of some piles of straw and firewood.
       "Put up your work, Mother," the man was saying. "You're always
complaining about your eyes being bad, but you go on working practically in the
dark."
       There was a fire in the hearth room next to the kitchen, and Musashi
thought he heard the whir of a spinning wheel. After a moment or two, the sound
stopped, and he heard someone moving about.
       The man came out of the shed and closed the door behind him. "I'll be in
as soon as I've washed my feet," he called. "You can go ahead and put dinner
on."
       He placed his sandals on a rock by a stream flowing behind the kitchen. As
he sat wiggling his feet in the water, the cow put her head close to his shoulder.
He rubbed her nose.
       "Mother," he called, "come here a minute. I made a real find today. What
do you think it is? ... It's a cow; a really fine one too."
       Musashi made his way quietly past the front door of the house. Crouching
on a stone beneath a side window, he looked into what turned out to be a hearth
room. The first object he saw was a lance hanging from a blackened rack near
the top of the wall, a fine weapon that had been polished and lovingly cared for.
Bits of gold shone dully on the leather of its scabbard. Musashi did not know
what to make of it; it was not the sort of thing usually found in a farmer's house.
Farmers were forbidden to have weapons, even if they could afford them.
       The man appeared for a moment in the light of the outside fire. At a
glance, Musashi knew he was no ordinary peasant. His eyes were too bright, too
alert. He wore a knee-length work kimono and mud-spattered leggings. His face
was round, and his bushy hair was tied in back with two or three lengths of
straw. Though he was short—no more than five feet six—he was thick-chested
and solidly built. He walked with firm, decisive steps.

      Smoke began to escape from the window. Musashi raised his sleeve to
cover his face, but too late; he inhaled a lungful of smoke and couldn't stop
himself from coughing.
      "Who's there?" the old woman called from the kitchen. She came into the
hearth room and said, "Gonnosuke, did you shut the shed? There seems to be a
millet thief around. I heard him cough."
      Musashi slipped away from the window and hid himself among the trees
of the windbreak.
      "Where?" shouted Gonnosuke, striding rapidly from behind the house. The
old woman appeared at the little window. "He must be right around here. I heard
him cough."
      "Are you sure it's not just your ears?"
      "My hearing's all right. And I'm sure I saw a face at the window. The
smoke from the fire must have made him cough."
      Slowly, suspiciously, Gonnosuke advanced fifteen or twenty paces,
looking carefully to right and left, as though he were a sentinel guarding a
fortress. "You may be right," he said. "I seem to smell a human being."
      Taking his cue from the look in Gonnosuke's eyes, Musashi bided his time.
There was something about the man's posture, something that said it was best to
be cautious. He seemed to be leaning slightly forward from the waist. Musashi
could not make out what sort of weapon he was carrying, but when he turned,
Musashi saw he had a four-foot staff behind his back. No ordinary pole, it had
the sheen of a much-used weapon and seemed to be an integral part of the man's
body. There was no question in Musashi's mind but that he lived with it day in
and day out and knew exactly how to use it.
      Moving into view, Musashi shouted, "You—whoever you are! I've come
for my companions!"
      Gonnosuke glared silently at him.
      "Give me back the woman and boy you kidnapped on the highroad. If
they're unharmed, we'll let it go at that. But if they've been injured, you're in for
it."
      The snowmelt feeding the streams in this area gave the breeze a sharp
edge, which somehow emphasized the silence.
      "Turn them over to me. Now!" Musashi's voice bit more sharply than the
wind.
      Gonnosuke had what was called a reverse hold on his staff. His hair
standing up like a hedgehog's, he straightened to his full height and shouted,

"You horse's turd! Who are you calling a kidnapper?"
       "You! You must have seen the boy and woman were unprotected, so you
kidnapped them and took them here. Bring them out!"
       The staff came away from Gonnosuke's side in a movement so rapid
Musashi could not tell where the man's arm ended and the weapon began.
       Musashi jumped aside. "Don't do anything you'll regret," he warned, then
withdrew several paces.
       "Who do you think you are, you crazy bastard!" As Gonnosuke spat out
his reply, he moved swiftly into action again, determined not to give- Musashi a
moment's rest. When the latter shifted ten paces, he covered the same distance
simultaneously.
       Twice Musashi started to move his right hand to the hilt of his sword, but
both times he stopped. During the instant when he grasped his sword, his elbow
would be exposed. Musashi had seen the swiftness of Gonnosuke's staff and
knew he wouldn't have time to complete the movement. He saw, too, that if he
allowed himself to make light of his stocky opponent, he'd be in trouble. And if
he didn't remain calm, even taking a breath could endanger him.
       Musashi had yet to size up this enemy, who at the moment had his legs and
torso in a splendid stance of the Indestructible-Perfect type. Musashi was already
beginning to feel that this farmer had a technique superior to that of any expert
swordsman he had encountered so far, and a look in his eyes suggested he had
mastered that Way which Musashi was forever seeking.
       But he had little time for assessment. Strike followed strike, almost by the
second, as one curse after another poured from Gonnosuke's mouth. Sometimes
he used both hands, sometimes only one, executing with flowing dexterity the
overhead strike, the lateral strike, the thrust and the shift. A sword, being
distinctly divided into blade and hilt, has only one point, but either end of a staff
can be applied lethally. Gonnosuke was wielding the staff with the same agility
as a candy-maker handling taffy: now it was long, now short, now invisible, now
high, now low—seemingly everywhere at once.
       From the window, the old woman urged her son to be careful.
"Gonnosuke! He doesn't look like an ordinary samurai!" She seemed to be as
involved in the fight as he was.
       "Don't worry!" The knowledge that she was watching appeared to raise
Gonnosuke's fighting spirit to an even higher pitch.
       At this point, Musashi ducked a blow to his shoulder, and in the same
movement slid in close to Gonnosuke and seized his wrist. The next instant, the

farmer was flat on his back, his feet kicking at the stars.
       "Wait!" shouted the mother, breaking the lattice of the window in her
excitement. Her hair stood on end; she seemed thunderstruck to see her son
downed.
       The wild look on her face kept Musashi from taking the next logical step,
which would have been to whip out his sword and finish Gonnosuke off. "All
right, I'll wait," he shouted, straddling Gonnosuke's chest and pinning him to the
ground.
       Gonnosuke was struggling valiantly to free himself. His legs, over which
Musashi had no control, flew in the air, then crashed into the earth as he arched
his back. It was all Musashi could do to keep him down.
       The mother came rushing out the kitchen door, screaming viperously,
"Look at you! How did you get into a mess like that?" But she added, "Don't
give up. I'm here to help you."
       Since she had asked Musashi to wait, he expected her to fall down on her
knees and beg him not to kill her son. But a glance told him that he was sadly
mistaken. She held the lance, now unsheathed, behind her, but he caught the
glint of the blade. And he felt her eyes burning into his back.
       "Filthy rōnin!" she cried. "Use a tricky throw, will you? You think we're
nothing but dumb farmers, don't you?"
       Musashi couldn't turn to ward off an attack from behind, because of the
way Gonnosuke was squirming about, trying to put Musashi in a position
advantageous to his mother.
       "Don't worry, Mother!" he said. "I'll make it. Don't get too close."
       "Keep calm," she cautioned. "You mustn't lose to the likes of him.
Remember your ancestors! What's happened to the blood you inherited from the
great Kakumyō, who fought side by side with the General of Kiso."
       "I won't forget!" yelled Gonnosuke. No sooner were the words out of his
mouth than he managed to raise his head and sink his teeth into Musashi's thigh,
at the same time letting go of his staff and striking Musashi with both hands. The
old woman chose this moment to level the lance at Musashi's back.
       "Wait!" shouted Musashi.
       They had reached a stage where settlement seemed possible only through
the death of one of them. If Musashi had been absolutely sure that by winning he
could free Otsū and Jōtarō, he would have pressed on. Now it seemed the better
part of valor to call a halt and talk things over. He turned his shoulders toward
the old woman and told her to put down the lance.

        "What should I do, son?"
        Gonnosuke was still pinned to the ground, but he was also having second
thoughts. Perhaps this rōnin had some reason to think his companions were here.
There was no sense in risking death over a misunderstanding.
        Once they had disentangled themselves, it took only a few minutes to
make it clear that it was all a mistake.
        The three of them repaired to the house and the blazing fire. Kneeling by
the hearth, the mother said, "Very dangerous! To think that there was no cause
for a fight to begin with."
        As Gonnosuke prepared to take his place beside her, she shook her head.
"Before you sit down," she said, "take the samurai all through the house, so that
he can be satisfied that his friends aren't here." Then, to Musashi: "I want you to
look carefully and see for yourself."
        "That's a good idea," agreed Gonnosuke. "Come with me, sir. Examine the
house from top to bottom. I dislike being suspected of kidnapping."
        Already seated, Musashi declined. "It's not necessary. From what you've
told me, I'm sure you had nothing to do with the kidnapping. Forgive me for
accusing you."
        "I was partly to blame," Gonnosuke said apologetically. "I should have
found out what you were talking about before I lost my temper."
        Musashi then asked, somewhat hesitantly, about the cow, explaining that
he was quite sure it was the one he had rented in Seta.
        "I just happened to find her," replied Gonnosuke. "This evening, I was
down at Nobu Pond netting loaches, and on my way home I saw the cow with
one leg sunk in the mud. It's swampy down there. The more she struggled, the
deeper she sank. She was raising an awful rumpus, so I pulled her free. When I
asked around the neighborhood, she didn't seem to belong to anybody, so I
thought a thief must have stolen her and later abandoned her.
        "A cow's worth about half a man on a farm, and this is a good one, with a
young udder." Gonnosuke laughed. "I sort of decided that heaven must have sent
the cow to me because I'm poor and can't do anything for my mother without a
little supernatural help. I don't mind giving the animal back to her owner, but I
don't know who that is."
        Musashi noted that Gonnosuke told his story with the simple
straightforward honesty of a person born and brought up in the country.
        His mother became sympathetic. "I'm sure this rōnin's worried about his
friends," she said. "Eat your dinner and take him to look for them. I only hope

they're somewhere near the pond. The hills are no place for strangers. They're
full of bandits who'll steal anything—horses, vegetables, anything! This whole
business sounds like some of their work."
       The breeze would begin as a whisper, mushroom into a violent gust, then
roar through the trees and raise havoc with the smaller plants.
       During a lull that left only the ominous silence of the stars above,
Gonnosuke held the torch high and waited for Musashi to catch up with him.
       "Sorry," he said, "but nobody seems to know anything about them. There's
just one more house between here and the pond. It's behind those woods over
there. The owner farms part of the time and hunts the rest. If he can't help us,
there's nowhere else to look."
       "Thanks for going to all this trouble. We've already been to more than ten
houses, so I suppose there's not much hope of their being around here. If we
don't find out anything at this next house, let's give up and go back."
       It was past midnight. Musashi had expected they would at least find some
trace of Jōtarō, but no one had seen him. Descriptions of Otsū had brought
nothing but blank looks and long country pauses.
       "If it's the walking you're thinking about, that's nothing to me. I could walk
all night. Are the woman and boy servants of yours? Brother? Sister?" "They're
the people closest to me."
       Each would have liked to ask the other more about himself, but
Gonnosuke lapsed into silence, moved a pace or two ahead and guided Musashi
along a narrow path toward Nobu Pond.
       Musashi was curious about Gonnosuke's skill with the staff and how he
had acquired it, but his sense of propriety kept him from asking about it. Musing
that his meeting the man was due to a mishap—and his own rashness—he
nevertheless felt extremely grateful. What a misfortune it would have been to
miss seeing this great fighter's dazzling technique!
       Gonnosuke stopped and said, "You'd better wait here. Those people are
probably asleep, and we don't want to frighten them. I'll go alone and see if I can
find out anything."
       He pointed out the house, whose thatched roof seemed nearly buried in the
trees. A rustling of bamboo accompanied his running footsteps. Presently
Musashi heard him knocking loudly on the door.
       He returned a few minutes later with a story that seemed to give Musashi
his first real lead. It had taken him a while to make the man and his wife
understand what he was asking about, but finally the wife told him of something

that had happened to her that afternoon.
       A little before sundown, on her way home from shopping, the woman had
seen a boy running toward Yabuhara, hands and face covered with mud and a
long wooden sword in his obi. When she stopped him and asked what was
wrong, he responded by asking her where the office of the shōgun's deputy was.
He went on to tell her that a bad man had carried off the person he was traveling
with. She advised him that he was wasting his time; the shōgun's officers would
never on their own organize a search for a person of no consequence. If it was
somebody great or important, or if they had orders from above, they would turn
every dollop of horse manure, every grain of sand, but they had no use for
common folk. Anyway, for a woman to be kidnapped or a traveler to be stripped
clean by highwaymen was nothing unusual. Things like that happened morning,
noon and night.
       She had told the boy to go past Yabuhara to a place called Narai. There, at
an intersection it was easy to see, he would find a wholesale house dealing in
herbs. It was owned by a man named Daizō, who would listen to his story and in
all likelihood offer to help him. Unlike the officials, Daizō not only sympathized
with the weak but would go to great lengths to help them if he thought their
cause was worthy.
       Gonnosuke ended by saying, "It sounded to me as though the boy was
Jōtarō. What do you think?"
       "I'm sure of it," said Musashi. "I suppose the best thing to do would be to
go to Narai as quickly as possible and look up this man Daizō. Thanks to you, I
at least have an idea what to do."
       "Why not spend the rest of the night at my house? You can start out in the
morning, after you've had some breakfast."
       "May I do that?"
       "Sure. If we cross Nobu Pond, we can get home in less than half the time it
took us to get here. I asked the man and he said we could use his boat."
       The pond, at the end of a short downhill walk, looked like a gigantic
drumhead. Encircled by purple willow trees, it must have been twelve or thirteen
hundred yards in diameter. The dark shadow of Mount Koma was reflected in
the water, along with a skyful of stars.
       With Musashi holding the torch and Gonnosuke poling, they slid silently
across the middle of the pond. Far redder than the torch itself was its reflection
in the smooth water.
