The Abduction


       Beyond the pass, the snow on Mount Koma glistened in lancelike streaks,
while on Mount Ontake, visible through the faintly reddish tree buds, it lay in
scattered patches. The light green heralding the growing season seemed to
shimmer along the highroad and in the fields.
       Otsū daydreamed. Jōtarō was like a new plant—stubborn and hardy. It
would take an awful lot to trample him, to keep him down for long. He was
growing fast these days; occasionally she thought she caught a glimpse of the
man he would one day be.
       The line between rambunctiousness and insolence was a fine one,
however, and even making allowances for his unorthodox upbringing, Otsū was
growing more and more dismayed with Jōtarō's behavior. His demands,
particularly for food, were unending. Every time they came to a food shop, he
stopped dead and wouldn't budge until she'd bought him something.
       After buying rice crackers at Suhara, she vowed, "This is the very last
time." But before they'd gone a mile farther, the crackers were gone, and he was
claiming to be half starved. The next crisis was only just averted by stopping at a
tea shop in Nezame for an early lunch; by the time they'd crossed another pass,
he was famished again.
       "Look, Otsū! That shop has dried persimmons. Shouldn't we get some, just
to carry with us?"
       Pretending not to hear, Otsū rode on.
       When they arrived at Fukushima, in Shinano Province, a place famous for
the variety and abundance of its food products, it was midafternoon, about the
time they were in the habit of having a snack.
       "Let's rest awhile," he whined. "Please."
       She paid no attention.
       "Come on, Otsū! Let's have some of those rice cakes coated with soybean
flour. The ones they make here are famous. Don't you want any?" Since he now
had hold of the cow's rope, Otsū saw it was going to be difficult to get past the
shop.
       "Haven't you had enough?" she said with annoyance.
       The cow, as if in secret alliance with Jōtarō, stopped and began munching

grass by the roadside.
       "All right!" snapped Otsū. "If that's the way you're going to act, I'll go on
ahead and tell Musashi." When she made as if to dismount, Jōtarō burst into
laughter, knowing perfectly well she wouldn't carry out her threat.
       Her bluff called, Otsū resignedly got off the cow, and together they went
into the open-sided lean-to in front of the shop. Jōtarō shouted an order for two
servings, then went out to tether the cow.
      When he returned, Otsū said, "You shouldn't have ordered any for me. I'm
      not hungry."
      "You don't want anything to eat?"
      "No. People who eat too much turn into stupid pigs."
      "Ah, I guess I'll have to eat yours too."
      "You are shameless!"
       His mouth was too full for his ears to hear. Presently, however, he paused
long enough to shift his wooden sword to his back, where it wouldn't interfere
with his expanding ribs. He began eating again, but all at once stuffed the last
rice cake in his mouth and bolted for the exit.
       "Through already?" Otsū called after him. She laid some money on the
table and started to follow him, but he returned and roughly shoved her back
inside.
      "Wait!" he said excitedly. "I just saw Matahachi."
      "You couldn't have." She turned pale. "What would he be doing around
      here?"
      "I have no idea. Didn't you see him? He had on a basket hat, and he was
      staring straight at us."
      "I don't believe it."
      "Want me to bring him in here and prove it?"
      "You'll do no such thing!"
      "Oh, don't worry. If anything happens, I'll go get Musashi."
       Otsū’s pulse was beating wildly, but realizing that the longer they stood
there, the farther ahead Musashi would have gone, she got back on the cow.
       As they started off, Jōtarō said, "I can't figure it out. Until we got to the
waterfall at Magome, we were all as friendly as could be. Since then, Musashi's
hardly said a word, and you haven't been talking to him either. What's the
matter?"
       When she said nothing, he went on: "Why is he walking on ahead of us?
Why do we sleep in different rooms now? Did you have a fight or something?"

       Otsū couldn't bring herself to give him an honest answer, for she hadn't
been able to give herself one. Did all men treat women the way Musashi had
treated her, openly trying to force his love on her? And why had she rejected him
so vehemently? Her distress and confusion now were, in a way, more painful
than the illness from which she had but recently recovered. The fountain of love
that had comforted her for years had suddenly turned into a raging waterfall.
       The memory of that other waterfall resounded in her ears, along with her
own cry of distress and Musashi's angry protest.
       She could ask herself whether they would go on like this forever, never
understanding each other, but why she was now trailing along behind him, trying
not to lose sight of him, struck even her as illogical. Though, out of
embarrassment, they kept apart and spoke rarely, Musashi showed no signs of
breaking his promise to go with her to Edo.
       At the Kōzenji they turned onto another road. There was a barrier at the
top of the first hill. Otsū had heard that ever since the Battle of Sekigahara,
government officials had been examining travelers, particularly women, on this
road with great thoroughness. But Lord Karasumaru's letter of introduction
worked like a charm, and they passed the checkpoint without difficulty.
       As they reached the last of the tea shops on the far side of the barrier,
Jōtarō asked, "Otsū, what does 'Fugen' mean?"
       "Fugen?"
       "Yeah. Back there, in front of a tea shop, a priest pointed at you and said
you 'looked like Fugen on a cow.' What does that mean?"
       "I suppose he was referring to the Bodhisattva Fugen."
       "That's the bodhisattva that rides on an elephant, isn't it? In that case, I
must be the Bodhisattva Monju. They're always together."
      "A very gluttonous Monju, I should say."
      "Good enough for a crybaby Fugen!"
      "Oh, you would say that!"
      "Why are Fugen and Monju always together? They're not a man and a
      woman."
       Intentionally or not, he was striking close again. Having heard much about
these things while she was living at the Shippōji, Otsū could have answered the
question in some detail, but she replied simply, "Monju represents wisdom,
Fugen, devoted conduct."
       "Stop!" The voice was Matahachi's and it came from behind them.
       Sick with revulsion, Otsū thought: "The coward!" She turned and stared

frigidly at him.
       Matahachi glared back, his feelings more muddled than ever. At
Nakatsugawa, it had been pure jealousy, but he'd continued to spy on Musashi
and Otsū. When he saw that they were keeping apart, he interpreted this as an
attempt to deceive people and imagined all sorts of scandalous goings-on when
they were alone.
      "Get down!" he commanded.
      Otsū stared at the cow's head, unable to speak. Her feeling toward him had
      settled once and for all into hatred and contempt.
      "Come on, woman, get down!"
      Though she burned with indignation, she spoke coldly. "Why? I have no
      business with you."
       "Is that so?" he growled menacingly, taking hold of her sleeve. "You may
not have any business with me, but I have business with you. Get down!"
       Jōtarō let go of the rope and shouted, "Leave her alone! If she doesn't want
to get off, why should she?" Holding his arms straight out, he butted Matahachi's
chest.
       "What do you think you're doing, you little bastard?" Thrown off balance,
Matahachi readjusted his feet in his sandals and raised his shoulders
threateningly. "I thought I'd seen your ugly face somewhere. You're the tramp
from the sake shop in Kitano."
       "Yeah, and now I know why you were drinking yourself silly. You were
living with some old bitch and you didn't have the guts to stand up to her. Isn't
that the truth?"
      Jōtarō couldn't have touched a more tender spot.
      "You snot-nosed runt!" Matahachi snatched at his collar, but Jōtarō ducked
      and came up on the other side of the cow.
      "If I'm a snot-nosed runt, what does that make you? Snot-nosed oaf! Scared
      of a woman!"
       Matahachi darted around the cow, but again Jōtarō slipped under the
animal's belly and came up on the other side. This happened three or four times
before Matahachi finally managed to latch on to the boy's collar.
       "All right, just say that one more time."
       "Snot-nosed oaf! Scared of a woman!"
       Jōtarō's wooden sword was only half drawn when Matahachi got a good
grip and sent him sailing well away from the road into a clump of bamboo. He
landed on his back in a small stream, stunned and only barely conscious.

       By the time he recovered enough to crawl like an eel back to the road, it
was too late. The cow was loping heavily along the road, Otsū still on her back,
Matahachi running ahead with the rope in his hand.
       "Bastard!" moaned Jōtarō, stung by his own helplessness. Too dazed to get
to his feet, he lay there fuming and cursing.


       On a hill a mile or so ahead, Musashi was resting his feet and idly
wondering whether the clouds were moving or, as they seemed, were
permanently suspended between Mount Koma and the broad foothills below.
       He started, as though at some wordless communication, shook himself and
straightened up.
       His thoughts were really on Otsū, and the more he thought, the angrier he
became. Both his shame and his resentment had been washed away in the
swirling basin under the falls, but as the days passed the doubts kept coming
back. Had it been wicked of him to reveal himself to her? Why had she rebuffed
him, shrunk from him as though she despised him?
       "Leave her behind," he said out loud. Yet he knew he was only deceiving
himself. He had told her that when they reached Edo, she could study what was
best for her, while he followed his own path. Implicit in this was a promise for
the more distant future. He had left Kyoto with her. He had a responsibility to
stay with her.
       "What will happen to me? With two of us, what will happen to my
sword?" He raised his eyes to the mountain and bit his tongue, ashamed of his
pettiness. To look at the great peak was humbling.
      He wondered what could be keeping them and stood up. He could see the
      forest a mile back, but no people.
      "Could they have been held up at the barrier?"
      The sun would be setting soon; they should have caught up long ago.
       Suddenly, he felt alarmed. Something must have happened. Before he
knew it, he was tearing down the hill so fast that the animals in the fields
scurried off in all directions.
