First Planting


       The management of the palatial Hosokawa residence in Edo, as well as the
performance of the fief's duties to the shōgun, was entrusted to a man still in his
early twenties, Tadatoshi, the eldest son of the daimyō, Hosokawa Tadaoki. The
father, a celebrated general who also enjoyed a reputation as a poet and master of
the tea ceremony, preferred to live at the large Kokura fief in Buzen Province on
the island of Kyushu.
       Though Nagaoka Sado and a number of other trusted retainers were
assigned to assist the young man, this was not because he was in any way
incompetent. He was not only accepted as a peer by the powerful vassals closest
to the shōgun but had distinguished himself as an energetic and farsighted
administrator. In fact, he seemed more in tune with the peace and prosperity of
the times than the older lords, who had been nurtured on constant warfare.
       At the moment, Sado was walking in the general direction of the riding
ground. "Have you seen the Young Lord?" he asked of an apprentice samurai
coming toward him.
       "I believe he's at the archery range."
       As Sado threaded his way down a narrow path, he heard a voice asking,
"May I have a word with you?"
       Sado stopped, and Iwama Kakubei, a vassal respected for his shrewdness
and practicality, came up to him. "You're going to talk with his lordship?" he
asked.
       "Yes."
       "If you're not in a hurry, there's a little matter I'd like to consult with you
about. Why don't we sit down over there?" As they walked the few steps to a
rustic arbor, Kakubei said, "I have a favor to ask. If you have a chance during
your talk, there's a man I'd like to recommend to the Young Lord."
       "Someone wanting to serve the House of Hosokawa?"
       "Yes. I know all sorts of people come to you with the same request, but
this man's very unusual."
       "Is he one of those men interested only in security and a stipend?"
"Definitely not. He's related to my wife. He's been living with us since he came
up from Iwakuni a couple of years ago, so I know him quite well." "Iwakuni?

The House of Kikkawa held Suō Province before the Battle of Sekigahara. Is he
one of their rōnin?"
       "No. He's the son of a rural samurai. His name's Sasaki Kojirō. He's still
young, but he was trained in the Tomita Style of Kanemaki Jisai, and he learned
the techniques of drawing a sword with lightning swiftness from Lord Katayama
Hisayasu of Hōki. He's even created a style of his own, which he calls Ganryū."
Kakubei went on, listing in detail Kojirō's various exploits and accomplishments.
       Sado was not really listening. His mind had gone back to his last visit to
the Tokuganji. Though he was sure, even from the little he'd seen and heard, that
Musashi was the right sort of man for the House of Hosokawa, he had intended
to meet him personally before recommending him to his master. In the
meantime, a year and a half had slipped by without his finding an opportunity to
visit Hōtengahara.
       When Kakubei finished, Sado said, "I'll do what I can for you," and
continued on to the archery range.
       Tadatoshi was engaged in a contest with some vassals of his own age, none
of whom was remotely a match for him. His shots, unerringly on target, were
executed with flawless style. A number of retainers had chided him for taking
archery so seriously, arguing that in an age of gun and lance, neither sword nor
bow was any longer of much use in actual combat. To this he had replied
cryptically, "My arrows are aimed at the spirit."
       The Hosokawa retainers had the highest respect for Tadatoshi, and would
have served under him with enthusiasm even if his father, to whom they were
also devoted, had not been a man of substantial accomplishments. At the
moment, Sado regretted the promise he'd just made to Kakubei. Tadatoshi was
not a man to whom one lightly recommended prospective retainers.
       Wiping the sweat off his face, Tadatoshi walked past several young
samurai with whom he'd been talking and laughing. Catching sight of Sado, he
called, "How about it, Ancient One? Have a shot?"
       "I make it a rule to compete only against adults," Sado replied.
       "So you still think of us as little boys with our hair tied up on our heads?"
"Have you forgotten the Battle of Yamazaki? Nirayama Castle? I have been
       commended for my performance on the battlefield, you know. Besides, I
go in for real archery, not—"
       "Ha, ha. Sorry I mentioned it. I didn't mean to get you started again." The
others joined in the laughter. Slipping his arm out of his sleeve, Tadatoshi
became serious and asked, "Did you come to discuss something?"

      After going over a number of routine matters, Sado said, "Kakubei says he
has a samurai to recommend to you."
      For a moment there was a faraway look in Tadatoshi's eyes. "I suppose he's
talking about Sasaki Kojirō. He's been mentioned several times."
     "Why don't you call him in and have a look at him?"
     "Is he really good?"
     "Shouldn't you see for yourself?"
      Tadatoshi put on his glove and accepted an arrow from an attendant. "I'll
take a look at Kakubei's man," he said. "I'd also like to see that rōnin you
mentioned. Miyamoto Musashi, was it?"
     "Oh, you remember?"
     "I do. You're the one who seems to have forgotten."
     "Not at all. But being so busy, I haven't had a chance to go out to Shimōsa."
      "If you think you've found someone, you should take the time. I'm
surprised at you, Sado, letting something so important wait until you've got other
business to take you out there. It's not like you."
      "I'm sorry. There're always too many men looking for positions. I thought
you'd forgotten about it. I suppose I should have brought it up again."
      "Indeed you should have. I don't necessarily accept other people's
recommendations, but I'm eager to see anyone old Sado considers suitable.
Understand?"
      Sado apologized again before taking his leave. He went directly to his own
house and without further ado had a fresh horse saddled and set out for
Hōtengahara.


      "Isn't this Hōtengahara?"
      Satō Genzō, Sado's attendant, said, "That's what I thought, but this is no
wilderness. There're rice fields all over. The place they were trying to develop
must be nearer the mountains."
      They had already gone a good distance beyond the Tokuganji and would
soon be on the highroad to Hitachi. It was late afternoon, and the white herons
splashing about in the paddies made the water seem like powder. Along the
riverbank and in the shadows of hillocks grew patches of hemp and waving
stalks of barley.
     "Look over there, sir," said Genzō.
     "What is it?"

      "There's a group of farmers."
      "So there is. They seem to be bowing to the ground, one by one, don't
      they?"
      "It looks like some sort of religious ceremony."
      With a snap of the reins, Genzō forded the river first, making sure it was
      safe for Sado to follow.
      "You, there!" called Genzō.
       The farmers, looking surprised, spread out from their circle to face the
visitors. They were standing in front of a small cabin, and Sado could see that
the object they'd been bowing before was a tiny wooden shrine, no larger than a
birdcage. There were about fifty of them, on their way home from work, it
appeared, for their tools had all been washed.
       A priest came forward, saying, "Why, it's Nagaoka Sado, isn't it? What a
pleasant surprise!"
       "And you're from the Tokuganji, aren't you? I believe you're the one who
guided me to the village after the bandit raid."
       "That's right. Have you come to pay a call at the temple?"
       "No, not this time. I'll be going back right away. Could you tell me where I
might find that rōnin named Miyamoto Musashi?"
       "He's not here anymore. He left very suddenly."
       "Left suddenly? Why should he do that?"
       "One day last month, the villagers decided to take a day off and celebrate
the progress that's been made here. You can see for yourself how green it is now.
Well, the morning after that, Musashi and the boy, Iori, were gone." The priest
looked around, as though half expecting Musashi to materialize out of the air.
       In response to Sado's prompting, the priest filled in the details of his story.
After the village had strengthened its defenses under Musashi's leadership, the
farmers were so thankful for the prospect of living in peace that they practically
deified him. Even the ones who had ridiculed him most cruelly had come
forward to help with the development project.
       Musashi treated them all fairly and equally, first convincing them that it
was pointless to live like animals. He then tried to impress upon them the
importance of exerting a little extra effort so as to give their children a chance
for a better life. To be real human beings, he told them, they must work for the
sake of posterity.
       With forty or fifty villagers pitching in to help each day, by fall they were
able to keep the floodwaters under control. When winter came, they plowed.

And in the spring, they drew water from the new irrigation ditches and
transplanted the rice seedlings. By early summer the rice was thriving, while in
the dry fields, hemp and barley were already a foot high. In another year, the
crop would double; the year after that, triple.
       Villagers began to drop in at the cabin to pay their respects, thanking
Musashi from the bottom of their hearts, the women bearing gifts of vegetables.
On the day of the celebration, the men arrived with great jars of sake, and all
took part in performing a sacred dance, accompanied by drums and flutes.
       With the villagers gathered around him, Musashi had assured them that it
was not his strength, but theirs. "All I did was show you how to use the energy
you possess."
       Then he had taken the priest aside to tell him that he was concerned about
their relying on a vagabond like him. "Even without me," he said, "they should
have confidence in themselves and maintain solidarity." He had then taken out a
statue of Kannon he'd carved and given it to the priest.
      The morning after the celebration, the village was in an uproar.
      "He's gone!"
      "He can't be."
      "Yes, he's disappeared. The cabin's empty."
      Grief-stricken, none of the farmers went near the fields that day.
       When he heard about it, the priest reproached them sharply for their
ingratitude, urging them to remember what they'd been taught and subtly
coaxing them to carry on the work that had been started.
       Later, the villagers had built the tiny shrine and placed the treasured image
of Kannon in it. They paid their respects to Musashi morning and evening, on
their way to and from the fields.
       Sado thanked the priest for the information, concealing the fact that he was
disconsolate as only a man of his position could do.
       As his horse made its way back through the evening mist of late spring, he
thought uneasily: "I shouldn't have put off coming. I was derelict in my duty, and
now I’ve failed my lord."
