Playing with Fire


       Unlike the other principal routes, there were no trees lining the Kōshū
highroad, which joined Shiojiri and Edo by way of Kai Province. Used for
military transport during the sixteenth century, it lacked the Nakasendō's
network of back roads and had only recently been upgraded to the status of a
main artery.
       For travelers coming from Kyoto or Osaka, its least agreeable feature was
a dearth of good inns and eating places. A request for a box lunch was likely to
bring forth nothing more appetizing than flat rice cakes wrapped in bamboo
leaves or, even less appealing, balls of plain rice done up in dried oak leaves.
Despite the primitive fare—probably not much different from that of the
Fujiwara period, hundreds of years earlier—the rustic hostelries swarmed with
guests, most of them bound for Edo.
       A group of travelers was taking a rest above Kobotoke Pass. One of them
exclaimed, "Look, there's another batch," referring to a sight he and his
companions had been enjoying almost daily—a group of prostitutes on their way
from Kyoto to Edo.
       The girls numbered about thirty, some old, some in their twenties or early
thirties, at least five in their middle teens. Together with about ten men who
managed or served them, they resembled a large. patriarchal family. There were
in addition several packhorses loaded down with everything from small wicker
baskets to man-sized wooden chests.
       The head of the "family," a man of about forty, was addressing his girls. "If
your straw sandals are giving you blisters, change into zōri, but tie them tight so
they don't slip around. And stop complaining that you can't walk any farther. Just
look at the children on the road, the children!" It was clear from his acid tone
that he was having a hard time forcing his usually sedentary charges to keep
moving.
       The man, whose name was Shōji Jinnai, was a native of Fushimi, a
samurai by birth, who had for reasons of his own abandoned the military life to
become a brothel keeper. Being both quick-witted and resourceful, he had
succeeded in gaining the support of Tokugawa Ieyasu, who often took up
residence at Fushimi Castle, and had not only obtained permission to move his

own business to Edo but had also persuaded many of his colleagues in the trade
to do likewise.
        Near the crest of Kobotoke, Jinnai brought his procession to a halt, saying,
"It's still a little early, but we can have our lunch now." Turning to Onao, an old
woman who functioned as a sort of mother hen, he ordered her to pass out the
food.
        The basket containing the box lunches was duly unloaded from one of the
horses and a leaf-wrapped ball of rice dealt out to each of the women, who
scattered themselves about and relaxed. The dust that had yellowed their skin
had also turned their black hair nearly white, though they wore broad-brimmed
traveling hats or had tied hand towels around their heads. There being no tea,
eating entailed a good deal of lip smacking and tooth sucking. There was no
suggestion of sexual wiles or amorous thrills. "Whose arms will embrace this
red, red blossom tonight?" seemed utterly beside the point.
        "Oh, this is delicious!" cried one of Jinnai's younger charges ecstatically.
Her tone of voice would have brought tears to her mother's eyes.
      The attention of two or three others wandered from their lunch to focus on a
      young samurai passing by.
      "Isn't he handsome?" whispered one.
      "Umm, not bad," replied another, of more worldly outlook.
      A third volunteered, "Oh, I know him. He used to come to our place with
      men from the Yoshioka School."
        "Which one are you talking about?" asked one lustful-eyed creature. "The
young one, strutting along there with the long sword on his back."
        Unaware of the admiration, Sasaki Kojirō was pushing his way through a
throng of porters and packhorses.
        A high, flirtatious voice called, "Mr. Sasaki! Over here, Mr. Sasaki!" Since
there were lots of people named Sasaki, he didn't even turn. "You with the
forelock!"
        Kojirō's eyebrows shot up, and he spun around.
        "Watch your tongues!" Jinnai shouted angrily. "You're being rude." Then,
glancing up from his lunch, he recognized Kojirō.
        "Well, well," he said, rising quickly. "If it isn't our friend Sasaki! Where
are you headed, if I may ask?"
        "Why, hello. You're the master of the Sumiya, aren't you? I'm going to
Edo. And what about you? You seem to be engaged in a full-scale move."
      "That we are. We're moving to the new capital."

      "Really? Do you think you can make a go of it there?"
      "Nothing grows in stagnant waters."
       "The way Edo's growing, I imagine there's plenty of work for construction
workers and gunsmiths. But elegant entertainment? It seems doubtful there's
much demand for it yet."
       "You're wrong, though. Women made a city out of Osaka before Hideyoshi
got around to taking any notice of it."
       "Maybe, but in a place as new as Edo, you probably won't even be able to
find a suitable house."
       "Wrong again. The government's set aside some marshland in a place
called Yoshiwara for people in my business. My associates have already started
filling it in, putting in streets and building houses. From all reports, I should be
able to find a good street-front location fairly easily."
      "You mean the Tokugawas are giving the land away? For free?"
      "Of course. Who'd pay for marshland? The government's even providing
      some of the construction materials."
      "I see. No wonder you're all abandoning the Kyoto area."
      "And what about you? Or do you have some prospect of a position with a
      daimyō?"
       "Oh, no; nothing like that. I wouldn't take one if it was offered. I just
thought I'd see what's going on up there, since it's the shōgun's residence and the
place where orders are going to come from in the future. Of course, if I were
asked to be one of the shōgun's instructors, I might accept."
       Though no judge of swordsmanship, Jinnai had a good eye for people.
Thinking it just as well not to comment on Kojirō's unbridled egotism, he
averted his eyes and began prodding his troop into movement. "Everybody up
now! It's time we were going."
       Onao, who had been counting heads, said, "We seem to be missing one
girl. Which one is it, now? Kichō? Or maybe Sumizome? No; they're both over
there. This is strange. Who could it be?"
      Kojirō, disinclined to have a party of prostitutes for traveling companions,
      went on his way.
      A couple of the girls who had gone back down the road to search returned
      to where Onao was.
      Jinnai joined them. "Here, here, Onao, which one is it?"
       "Ah, I know now. It was that girl named Akemi," she replied contritely, as
if the fault were hers. "The one you picked up on the road in Kiso."

       "She must be around here somewhere."
       "We've looked everywhere. I think she must have run away."
       "Well, I didn't have a written commitment from her, and I didn't lend her
any 'body money.' She said she was willing, and since she was good-looking
enough to be marketable, I took her on. I suppose she's cost me a bit in traveling
expenses, but not enough to worry about. Never mind her. Let's get moving."
       He began hustling his group along. Even if it meant traveling after
sundown, he wanted to reach Hachiōji within the day. If they could get that far
before stopping, they could be in Edo the next day.
       A short way down the road, Akemi reappeared and fell in with them.
       "Where have you been?" Onao demanded angrily. "You can't just wander
off without telling anyone where you're going. Unless, of course, you're planning
to leave us." The old woman went on to explain self-righteously how they had
all been so worried about her.
       "You don't understand," said Akemi, from whom the scolding brought
nothing but giggles. "There was a man I know on the road, and I didn't want him
to see me. I ran into a clump of bamboo, not knowing there was a sudden drop-
off there. I slid all the way down to the bottom." She corroborated this by
holding up her torn kimono and a skinned elbow. But all the time she was
begging forgiveness, her face showed not the slightest sign of contrition.
       From his position near the front, Jinnai caught wind of what had happened
and summoned her. Sternly he said, "Your name's Akemi, isn't it? Akemi—that's
hard to remember. If you're really going to succeed in this business, you'll have
to find a better name. Tell me, have you really resolved to go through with this?"
       "Does it require resolution to become a whore?"
       "It's not something you can take up for a month or so and then quit. And if
you become one of my girls, you'll have to give the customers what they ask for,
like it or not. Don't make any mistake about that."
       "What difference does it make now? Men have already made a mess of my
life."
       "That's not the right attitude at all. Now, you give this some careful
thought. If you change your mind before we reach Edo, that's all right. I won't
ask you to pay me back for your food and lodging."
       That same day, at the Yakuōin in Takao, an older man, apparently free of
the pressures of business, was about to resume his leisurely journey. He, his
servant and a boy of about fifteen had arrived the previous evening and
requested overnight accommodations. He and the boy had been touring the

temple grounds since early morning. It was now about noon.
       "Use this for roof repairs, or whatever is necessary," he said, offering one
of the priests three large gold coins.
       The head priest, immediately apprised of the gift, was so overwhelmed by
the donor's generosity that he personally hastened out to exchange greetings.
"Perhaps you would like to leave your name," he said.
       Another priest, saying this had already been done, showed him the entry in
the temple registry, which read: "Daizō of Narai, dealer in herbs, resident at the
foot of Mount Ontake in Kiso."
       The head priest apologized profusely for the poor quality of the fare served
by the temple, for Daizō of Narai was known throughout the country as a lavish
contributor to shrines and temples. His gifts always took the form of gold coins
—in some cases, it was said, as many as several dozen. Only he himself knew
whether he did this for amusement, to acquire a reputation, or out of piety.
       The priest, eager to have him stay longer, begged him to inspect the
temple's treasures, a privilege accorded to few.
       "I'll be in Edo awhile," said Daizō. "I'll come see them another time."
       "By all means, but at least let me accompany you to the outer gate,"
insisted the priest. "Are you planning to stop in Fuchū tonight?"
      "No; Hachiōji."
      "In that case, it'll be an easy trip."
      "Tell me, who's the lord of Hachiōji now?"
      "It's recently been put under the administration of Ōkubo Nagayasu." "He
      was magistrate of Nara, wasn't he?"
      "Yes, that's the man. The gold mines on Sado Island are also under his
      control. He's very rich."
      "A very able man, it would appear."
       It was still daylight when they came to the foot of the mountains and stood
on the busy main street of Hachiōji, where reportedly there were no fewer than
twenty-five inns.
       "Well, Jōtarō, where shall we stay?"
       Jōtarō, who had stuck to Daizō's side like a shadow, let it be known in no
uncertain terms that he preferred "anywhere—as long as it's not a temple."
       Choosing the largest and most imposing inn, Daizō entered and requested
a room. His distinguished appearance, together with the elegant lacquered
traveling case his servant carried on his back, made a dazzling impression on the
head clerk, who said fawningly, "You're stopping quite early, aren't you?" Inns

along the highroads were accustomed to having hordes of travelers tumble in at
dinnertime or even later.
       Daizō was shown to a large room on the first floor, but shortly after
sundown, both the innkeeper and the head clerk came to Daizō's room.
       "I'm sure it's a great inconvenience," the innkeeper began abjectly, "but a
large party of guests has come in very suddenly. I'm afraid it'll be terribly noisy
here. If you wouldn't mind moving to a room on the second floor ..."
       "Oh, that's perfectly all right," replied Daizō good-naturedly. "Glad to see
your business is thriving."
       Signaling Sukeichi, his servant, to take care of the luggage, Daizō
proceeded upstairs. He had no sooner left the room than it was overrun by
women from the Sumiya.
       The inn wasn't just busy; it was frenetic. What with the hubbub
downstairs, the servants did not come when called. Dinner was late, and when
they had eaten, no one came to clear away the dishes. On top of that, there was
the constant tramping of feet on both floors. Only Daizō's sympathy for the hired
help kept him from losing his temper. Ignoring the litter in the room, he stretched
out to take a nap, using his arm for a pillow. After only a few minutes, a sudden
thought came to him, and he called Sukeichi.
       When Sukeichi failed to materialize, Daizō opened his eyes, sat up and
shouted, "Jōtarō, come here!"
       But he, too, had disappeared.
       Daizō got up and went to the veranda, which he saw was lined with guests,
excitedly gaping with delight at the prostitutes on the first floor.
       Spying Jōtarō among the spectators, Daizō swiftly yanked him back into
the room. With a forbidding eye, he demanded, "What were you staring at?"
       The boy's long wooden sword, which he did not take off even indoors,
scraped the tatami as he sat down. "Well," he said, "everyone else is looking."
     "And just what are they looking at?"
     "Oh, there're a lot of women in the back room downstairs."
     "Is that all?"
     "Yes."
       "What's so entertaining about that?" The presence of the whores didn't
bother Daizō, but for some reason he found the intense interest of the men
gawking at them annoying.
     "I don't know," replied Jōtarō honestly.
     "I'm going for a walk around town," Daizō said. "You stay here while I'm

     gone."
     "Can't I go with you?"
     "Not at night."
     "Why not?"
     "As I told you before, when I go for a walk, it's not simply to amuse
     myself."
     "Well, what's the idea, then?"
     "It has to do with my religion."
     "Don't you get enough of shrines and temples during the daytime? Even
     priests have to sleep at night."
      "Religion has to do with more than shrines and temples, young man. Now
go find Sukeichi for me. He has the key to my traveling case."
      "He went downstairs a few minutes ago. I saw him peeking into the room
where the women are."
      "Him too?" exclaimed Daizō with a click of his tongue. "Go get him, and
be quick about it." After Jōtarō had left, Daizō began retying his obi.
      Having heard the women were Kyoto prostitutes, famous for their beauty
and savoir faire, the male guests were unable to leave off feasting their eyes.
Sukeichi was so absorbed with the sight that his mouth was still hanging open
when Jōtarō located him.
     "Come on, you've seen enough," snapped the boy, giving the servant's ear a
     tug.
     "Ouch!" squealed Sukeichi.
     "Your master's calling you."
     "That's not true."
     "It is too. He said he was going for a walk. He's always taking walks, isn't
     he?"
     "Eh? Oh, all right," said Sukeichi, tearing his eyes away reluctantly.
     The boy had turned to follow him when a voice called, "Jōtarō? You're
     Jōtarō, aren't you?"
      The voice was that of a young woman. He looked around searchingly. The
hope that he would find his lost teacher and Otsū never left him. Could it be? He
peered tensely through the branches of a large evergreen shrub.
     "Who is it?"
     "Me"
     The face that emerged from the foliage was familiar.
     "Oh, it's only you."

       Akemi slapped him roughly on the back. "You little monster! And it's been
such a long time since I saw you. What are you doing here?"
      "I could ask you the same question."
      "Well, I ... Oh, it wouldn't mean anything to you anyway."
      "Are you traveling with those women?"
      "I am, but I haven't made up my mind yet."
      "Made up your mind about what?"
       "Whether to become one of them or not," she replied with a sigh. After a
long pause, she asked, "What's Musashi doing these days?"
       This, Jōtarō perceived, was what she really wanted to know. He only
wished he could answer the question.
       "Otsū and Musashi and I ... we got separated on the highroad."
       "Otsū? Who's she?" She had hardly spoken before she remembered. "Oh,
never mind; I know. Is she still chasing after Musashi?" Akemi was in the habit
of thinking of Musashi as a dashing shugyōsha, wandering about as the mood
suited him, living in the forest, sleeping on bare rocks. Even if she succeeded in
catching him, he'd see right away how dissolute her life had become and shun
her. She had long since resigned herself to the idea that her love would go
unrequited.
       But the mention of another woman awoke feelings of jealousy and
rekindled the dying embers of her amorous instinct.
       "Jōtarō," she said, "there're too many curious eyes around here. Let's go
out somewhere."
       They left via the garden gate. Out in the street, their eyes were regaled by
the lights of Hachiōji and its twenty-five hostelries. It was the liveliest town
either had seen since leaving Kyoto. To the northwest rose the dark, silent forms
of the Chichibu Range and the mountains marking the boundary of Kai
Province, but here the atmosphere was replete with the aroma of sake, noisy with
the clicking of weavers' reeds, the shouts of market officials, the excited voices
of gamblers and the dispirited whining songs of local street singers.
       "I often heard Matahachi mention Otsū," Akemi lied. "What kind of
person is she?"
       "She's a very good person," Jōtarō said soberly. "Sweet and gentle and
considerate and pretty. I really like her."
       The threat Akemi felt hanging over her grew heavier, but she cloaked her
feelings with a benign smile. "Is she really so wonderful?"
      "Oh, yes. And she can do anything. She sings; she writes well. And she's

      good at playing the flute."
      Now visibly ruffled, Akemi said, "I don't see what good it does a woman to
      be able to play the flute."
      "If you don't, you don't, but everybody, even Lord Yagyū Sekishūsai,
      speaks
      highly of Otsū. There's only one little thing I don't like about her."
      "All women have their faults. It's just a question of whether they honestly
       admit to them, the way I do, or try to hide them behind a ladylike pose."
"Otsū's not like that. It's just this one weakness of hers."
      "What's that?"
      "She's always breaking into tears. She's a regular crybaby."
      "Oh? Why is that?"
       "She cries whenever she thinks of Musashi. That makes being around her
pretty gloomy, and I don't like it." Jōtarō expressed himself with youthful
abandon, heedless of the effect this might have.
       Akemi's heart, her whole body, was afire with raging jealousy. It showed
in the depths of her eyes, even in the color of her skin. But she continued her
interrogation. "Tell me, how old is she?"
      "About the same."
      "You mean the same age as me?"
      "Urn. But she looks younger and prettier."
       Akemi plunged on, hoping to turn Jōtarō against Otsū. "Musashi's more
masculine than most men. He must hate having to watch a woman carry on all
the time. Otsū probably thinks tears will win a man's sympathy. She's like the
girls working for the Sumiya."
       Jōtarō, very much irked, retorted, "That's not true at all. In the first place,
Musashi likes Otsū. He never shows his feelings, but he's in love with her."
      Akemi's flushed face grew bright crimson. She longed to throw herself into
      a river to quench the flames that were consuming her.
      "Jōtarō, let's go this way." She pulled him toward a red light in a side street.
      "That's a drinking place."
      "Well, what of it?"
      "Women have no business in a place like that. You can't go in there."
      "All of a sudden I have the urge to drink, and I can't go in alone. I'd be
      embarrassed."
       "You'd be embarrassed. What about me?"
       "They'll have things to eat. You can have anything you want."

       At first glance, the shop seemed empty. Akemi walked right in, then,
facing the wall rather than the counter, said, "Bring me some sake!"
       One cup after another went down as fast as was humanly possible. Jōtarō,
frightened by the quantity, tried to slow her down, but she elbowed him out of
the way.
       "Quiet!" she yelped. "What a nuisance you are! Bring some more sake!
Sake!"
       Jōtarō, insinuating himself between her and the sake jar, pleaded, "You've
got to stop. You can't go on drinking here like this."
       "Don't worry about me," she slurred. "You're a friend of Otsū's, aren't you?
I can't stand women who try to win a man with tears!"
      "Well, I dislike women who get drunk."
      "I'm so sorry, but how could a runt like you understand why I drink?"
      "Come on, just pay the bill."
      "You think I've got money?"
      "Don't you?"
       "No. Maybe he can collect from the Sumiya. I've already sold myself to
the master anyway." Tears flooded her eyes. "I'm sorry ... I'm really sorry."
       "Weren't you the one who was making fun of Otsū for crying? Look at
yourself."
       "My tears aren't the same as hers. Oh, life's too much trouble. I might as
well be dead."
       With that, she stood up and lurched out into the street. The shopkeeper,
having had other female customers like this in his time, merely laughed it off,
but a rōnin who had until then been sleeping quietly in a corner opened his
bleary eyes and stared at her retreating back.
       Jōtarō darted after her and grabbed her around the waist, but he lost his
hold. She started running down the darkened street, Jōtarō close behind.
       "Stop!" he cried with alarm. "You mustn't even think of it. Come back!"
       Though she seemed not to care whether she ran into something in the dark
or fell into a swamp, she was fully conscious of Jōtarō's pleading. When she had
plunged into the sea at Sumiyoshi, she had wanted to kill herself, but she was no
longer so lacking in guile. She got a certain thrill from having Jōtarō so worried
about her.
       "Watch out!" he screamed, seeing that she was headed straight toward the
murky water of a moat. "Stop it! Why do you want to die? It's crazy."
       As he caught her around the waist again, she wailed, "Why shouldn't I die?

You think I'm wicked. So does Musashi. Everybody does. There's nothing I can
do but die, embracing Musashi in my heart. Never will I let him be taken from
me by a woman like that!"
      "You're pretty mixed up. How did you get this way?"
      "It doesn't matter. All you have to do is push me into the moat. Go ahead,
      Jōtarō, push." Covering her face with her hands, she burst into frenzied
      tears.
      This awakened a strange fear in Jōtarō. He, too, felt the urge to cry. "Come
      on, Akemi. Let's go back."
      "Oh, I yearn so to see him. Find him for me, Jōtarō. Please find Musashi for
      me."
      "Stand still! Don't move; it's dangerous."
      "Oh, Musashi!"
       "Watch out!"
       At that moment the rōnin from the sake shop stepped out of the darkness.
"Go away, boy," he commanded. "I'll take her back to the inn." He put his hands
under Jōtarō's arms and roughly lifted him aside.
       He was a tall man, thirty-four or -five years old, with deep-set eyes and a
heavy beard. A crooked scar, no doubt left by a sword, ran from below his right
ear to his chin. It looked like the jagged tear that appears when a peach is broken
open.
      Swallowing hard to overcome his fear, Jōtarō tried coaxing. "Akemi, please
      come with me. Everything'll be all right."
      Akemi's head was now resting on the samurai's chest.
      "Look," the man said, "she's gone to sleep. Off with you! I'll take her home
      later."
      "No! Let go of her!"
      When the boy refused to budge, the rōnin slowly reached out with one hand
      and grabbed his collar.
      "Hands off!" screamed Jōtarō, resisting with all his strength.
      "You little bastard! How'd you like to get thrown into the moat?"
       "Who's going to do it?" He wriggled loose, and as soon as he was free, his
hand found the end of his wooden sword. He swung it at the man's side, but his
own body did a somersault and landed on a rock by the roadside. He moaned
once, then remained still.
      Jōtarō had been out for some time before he began hearing voices around
      him.

      "Wake up, there."
      "What happened?"
      Opening his eyes, he vaguely took in a small crowd of people.
      "Are you awake?"
      "Are you all right?"
       Embarrassed by the attention he was attracting, he picked up his wooden
sword and was trying to get away when a clerk from the inn grabbed his arm.
"Wait a minute," he barked. "What happened to the woman you were with?"
       Looking around, Jōtarō got the impression that the others were also from
the inn, guests as well as employees. Some of the men were carrying sticks;
others were holding round paper lanterns.
      "A man came and said you'd been attacked and a rōnin had carried the
      woman off. Do you know which way they went?"
      Jōtarō, still dazed, shook his head.
      "That's impossible. You must have some idea."
       Jōtarō pointed in the first direction that came to hand. "Now I remember. It
was that way." He was reluctant to say what really happened, fearing a scolding
from Daizō for getting involved, but also dreading to admit in front of these
people that the rōnin had thrown him.
       Despite the vagueness of his reply, the crowd rushed off, and presently a
cry went up: "Here she is. Over here."
       The lanterns gathered in a circle around Akemi, whose disheveled form lay
where she had been abandoned, on a stack of hay in a farmer's shed. Prodded
back to reality by the clatter of running feet, she dragged herself to her feet. The
front of her kimono was open; her obi lay on the ground. Hay clung to her hair
and clothing.
       "What happened?"
       While the word "rape" was on the tip of everyone's tongue, no one said it.
Nor did it even cross their minds to chase the villain. Whatever had happened to
Akemi, they felt, she had brought on herself.
      "Come on, let's go back," said one of the men, taking her hand.
      Akemi pulled away quickly. Resting her face forlornly against the wall, she
      broke down in bitter tears.
      "Seems to be drunk."
      "How'd she get that way?"
       Jōtarō had been watching the scene from a distance. What had befallen
Akemi was not clear to him in detail, but somehow he was reminded of an

experience that had nothing to do with her. The titillation of lying in the fodder
shed in Koyagyū with Kocha came back to him, along with the strangely
exciting fear of approaching footsteps. But his pleasure quickly evaporated. "I
better get back," he said decisively.
      As his pace quickened, his spirit, back from its trip to the unknown, moved
him to break into song.


           Old metal Buddha, standing in the field,
           Have you seen a girl of sixteen?
           Don't you know a girl who's strayed?
           When asked, you say "Clang."
           When struck, you say "Bong."
