An Urgent Letter


       At thirty-eight, Yagyū Munenori was regarded as the best swordsman of
them all. This hadn't kept his father from constantly worrying about his fifth son.
"If only he can control that little quirk of his," he often said to himself. Or: "Can
anybody that self-willed manage to keep a high position?"
       It was now fourteen years since Tokugawa Ieyasu had commanded
Sekishūsai to provide a tutor. for Hidetada. Sekishūsai had passed over his other
sons, grandsons and nephews. Munenori was neither particularly brilliant nor
heroically masculine, but he was a man of good, solid judgment, a practical man
not likely to get lost in the clouds. He possessed neither his father's towering
stature nor Hyōgo's genius, but he was reliable, and most important, he
understood the cardinal principle of the Yagyū Style, namely that the true value
of the Art of War lay in its application to government.
       Sekishūsai had not misinterpreted Ieyasu's wishes; the conquering general
had no use for a swordsman to teach his heir only technical skills. Some years
before Sekigahara, Ieyasu himself had studied under a master swordsman named
Okuyama, his objective being, as he himself frequently expressed it, "to acquire
the eye needed to oversee the country."
       Still, Hidetada was now shōgun, and it would not do for the shōgun's
instructor to be a man who lost in actual combat. A samurai in Munenori's
position was expected to excel over all challengers and to demonstrate that
Yagyū swordsmanship was second to none. Munenori felt he was constantly
being scrutinized and tested, and while others might regard him as lucky to have
been singled out for this distinguished appointment, he himself often envied
Hyōgo and wished he could live the way his nephew did.
       Hyōgo, as it happened, was now walking down the outside passageway
leading to his uncle's room. The house, though large and sprawling, was neither
stately in appearance nor lavish in its appointments. Instead of employing
carpenters from Kyoto to create an elegant, graceful dwelling, Munenori had
deliberately entrusted the work to local builders, men accustomed to the sturdy,
spartan warrior style of Kamakura. Though the trees were relatively sparse, and
the hills of no great height, Munenori had chosen the solid rustic style of
architecture exemplified by the old Main House at Koyagyū.

      "Uncle," called Hyōgo softly and politely, as he knelt on the veranda
      outside Munenori's room.
      "Is that you, Hyōgo?" asked Munenori without removing his eyes from the
      garden.
      "May I come in?"
       Having received permission to enter, Hyōgo made his way into the room
on his knees. He had taken quite a few liberties with his grandfather, who was
inclined to spoil him, but he knew better than to do that with his uncle.
Munenori, though no martinet, was a stickler for etiquette. Now, as always, he
was seated in strict formal fashion. At times Hyōgo felt sorry for him.
       "Otsū?" asked Munenori, as though reminded of her by Hyōgo's arrival.
       "She's back. She'd only gone to Hikawa Shrine, the way she often does. On
the way back, she let her horse wander around for a while."
       "You went looking for her?"
       "Yes, sir."
       Munenori remained silent for a few moments. The lamplight accented his
tight-lipped profile. "It worries me to have a young woman living here
indefinitely. You never know what might happen. I've told Sukekurō to look for
an opportunity to suggest she go elsewhere."
       His tone slightly plaintive, Hyōgo said, "I'm told she has no place to go."
His uncle's change of attitude surprised him, for when Sukekurō had brought
Otsū home and introduced her as a woman who had served Sekishūsai well,
Munenori had welcomed her cordially and said she was free to stay as long as
she wished. "Don't you feel sorry for her?" he asked.
       "Yes, but there's a limit to what you can do for people."
       "I thought you yourself thought well of her."
       "It has nothing to do with that. When a young woman comes to live in a
house full of young men, tongues are apt to wag. And it's difficult for the men.
One of them might do something rash."
       This time Hyōgo was silent, but not because he took his uncle's remarks
personally. He was thirty and, like the other young samurai, single, but he firmly
believed his own feelings toward Otsū were too pure to raise doubts about his
intentions. He had been careful to allay his uncle's misgivings by making no
secret of his fondness for her, while at the same time not once letting on that his
feeling went beyond friendship.
       Hyōgo felt that the problem might lie with his uncle. Munenori's wife
came from a highly respected and well-placed family, of the sort whose

daughters were delivered to their husbands on their wedding day in curtained
palanquins lest they be seen by outsiders. Her chambers, together with those of
the other women, were well removed from the more public parts of the house, so
virtually no one knew whether relations between the master and his wife were
harmonious. It was not difficult to imagine that the lady of the house might take
a dim view of beautiful and eligible young women in such proximity to her
husband.
       Hyōgo broke the silence, saying, "Leave the matter to Sukekurō and me.
We'll work out some solution that won't be too hard on Otsū."
       Munenori nodded, saying, "The sooner the better."
       Sukekurō entered the anteroom just then, and placing a letter box on the
tatami, knelt and bowed. "Your lordship," he said respectfully.
      Turning his eyes toward the anteroom, Munenori asked, "What is it?"
      Sukekurō moved forward on his knees.
      "A courier from Koyagyū has just arrived by fast horse."
      "Fast horse?" said Munenori quickly, but without surprise.
       Hyōgo accepted the box from Sukekurō and handed it to his uncle.
Munenori opened the letter, which was from Shōda Kizaemon. Written in haste,
it said: "The Old Lord has had another spell, worse than any previous. We fear
he may not last long. He stoutly insists his illness is not sufficient reason for you
to leave your duties. However, after discussing the matter among ourselves, we
retainers decided to write and inform you of the situation."
       "His condition is critical," said Munenori.
       Hyōgo admired his uncle's ability to remain calm. He surmised that
Munenori knew exactly what was to be done and had already made the
necessary decisions.
      After some minutes of silence, Munenori said, "Hyōgo, will you go to
      Koyagyū in my stead?"
      "Of course, sir."
      "I want you to assure my father there's nothing to worry about in Edo. And
      I want you to look after him personally."
      "Yes, sir."
       "I suppose it's all in the hands of the gods and the Buddha now. All you
can do is hurry and try to get there before it's too late."
       "I'll leave tonight."
       From Lord Munenori's room, Hyōgo went immediately to his own. During
the short time it took him to lay out the few things he would need, the bad news

spread to every corner of the house.
       Otsū quietly went to Hyōgo's room, dressed, to his surprise, for traveling.
Her eyes were moist. "Please take me with you," she pleaded. "I can never hope
to repay Lord Sekishūsai for taking me into his home, but I'd like to be with him
and see if I can be of some assistance. I hope you won't refuse."
       Hyōgo considered it possible that his uncle might have refused her, but he
himself did not have the heart to. Perhaps it was a blessing that this opportunity
to take her away from the house in Edo had presented itself.
       "All right," he agreed, "but it'll have to be a fast journey."
       "I promise I won't slow you down." Drying her tears, she helped him finish
packing and then went to pay her respects to Lord Munenori.
       "Oh, are you going to accompany Hyōgo?" he said, mildly surprised.
"That's very kind of you. I'm sure my father will be pleased to see you." He
made a point of giving her ample travel money and a new kimono as a going-
away present. Despite his conviction that it was for the best, her departure
saddened him.
       She bowed herself out of his presence. "Take good care of yourself," he
said with feeling, as she reached the anteroom.
       The vassals and servants lined up along the path to the gate to see them
off, and with a simple "Farewell" from Hyōgo, they were on their way.
       Otsū had folded her kimono up under her obi, so the hem reached only five
or six inches below her knees. On her head was a broad-brimmed lacquered
traveling hat and in her right hand she carried a stick. Had her shoulders been
draped with blossoms, she would have been the image of the Wisteria Girl so
often seen in woodblock prints.
       Since Hyōgo had decided to hire conveyances at the stations along the
highroad, their goal tonight was the inn town of Sangen'ya, south of Shibuya.
From there, his plan was to proceed along the Oyama highroad to the Tama
River, take the ferry across, and follow the Tōkaidō to Kyoto.
       In the night mist, it was not long before Otsū’s lacquered hat glistened with
moisture. After walking through a grassy river valley, they came to a rather wide
road, which since the Kamakura period had been one of the most important in
the Kantō district. At night it was lonely and deserted, with trees growing thickly
on both sides.
       "Gloomy, isn't it?" said Hyōgo with a smile, again slowing down his
naturally long strides to let Otsū catch up with him. "This is Dōgen Slope. There
used to be bandits around here," he added.

       "Bandits?" There was just enough alarm in her voice to make him laugh.
       "That was a long time ago, though. A man by the name of Dōgen Tarō,
who was related to the rebel Wada Yoshimori, is supposed to have been the head
of a band of thieves who lived in the caves around here."
       "Let's not talk about things like that."
       Hyōgo's laughter echoed through the dark, and hearing it made him feel
guilty for acting frivolous. He couldn't help himself, however. Though sad, he
looked forward with pleasure to being with Otsū these next few days.
     "Oh!" cried Otsū, taking a couple of steps backward.
     "What's the matter?" Instinctively, Hyōgo's arm went around her shoulders.
     "There's somebody over there."
     "Where?"
     "It's a child, sitting there by the side of the road, talking to himself and
     crying. The poor thing!"
     When Hyōgo got close enough, he recognized the boy he had seen earlier
     that evening, hiding in the grass in Azabu.
       Iori leaped to his feet with a gasp. An instant later, he uttered an oath and
pointed his sword at Hyōgo. "Fox!" he cried. "That's what you are, a fox!"
       Otsū caught her breath and stifled a scream. The look on Iori's face was
wild, almost demonic, as if he were possessed by an evil spirit. Even Hyōgo
drew back cautiously.
       "Foxes!" Iori shouted again. "I'll take care of you!" His voice cracked
hoarsely, like an old woman's. Hyōgo stared at him in puzzlement but was
careful to steer clear of his blade.
       "How's this?" shouted Iori, whacking off the top of a tall shrub not far
from Hyōgo's side. Then he sank to the ground, exhausted by his effort.
Breathing hard, he asked, "What did you think of that, fox?"
     Turning to Otsū, Hyōgo said with a grin, "Poor little fellow. He seems to be
     possessed by a fox."
     "Maybe you're right. His eyes are ferocious."
     "Just like a fox's."
     "Isn't there something we can do to help him?"
       "Well, they say there's no cure for either madness or stupidity, but I suspect
there's a remedy for his ailment." He walked up to Iori and glared sternly at him.
       Glancing up, the boy hastily gripped his sword again. "Still here, are you?"
he cried. But before he could get to his feet, his ears were assailed by a fierce
roar coming from the pit of Hyōgo's stomach.

       "Y-a-a-w-r!"
       Iori was scared witless. Hyōgo picked him up by the waist, and holding
him horizontally, strode back down the hill to the bridge. He turned the boy
upside down, grasped him by the ankles and held him out over the railing.
       "Help! Mother! Help, help! Sensei! Save me!" The screams gradually
changed to a wail.
       Otsū hastened to the rescue. "Stop that, Hyōgo. Let him go. You shouldn't
be so cruel."
       "I guess that's enough," said Hyōgo, setting the boy down gently on the
bridge.
       Iori was in a terrible state, bawling and choking, convinced there was not a
soul on earth who could help him. Otsū went to his side and put her arm
affectionately around his drooping shoulders. "Where do you live, child?" she
asked softly.
      Between sobs, Iori stammered, "0-over th-th-that way," and pointed. "What
      do you mean, 'that way'?"
      "Ba-ba-bakurōchō."
      "Why, that's miles away. How did you get all the way out here?" "I came on
      an errand. I got lost."
      "When was that?"
      "I left Bakurōchō yesterday."
       "And you've been wandering around all night and all day?" Iori half shook
his head, but didn't say anything. "Why, that's terrible. Tell me, where were you
supposed to go?"
       A little calmer now, he replied promptly, as though he'd been waiting for
the question. "To the residence of Lord Yagyū Munenori of Tajima." After
feeling around under his obi, he clutched the crumpled letter and waved it
proudly in front of his face. Bringing it close to his eyes, he said, "It's for Kimura
Sukekurō. I'm to deliver it and wait for an answer."
       Otsū saw that Iori took his mission very seriously and was ready to guard
the missive with his life. Iori, for his part, was determined to show the letter to
no one before he reached his destination. Neither had any inkling of the irony of
the situation—a missed chance, a happening rarer than the coming together
across the River of Heaven of the Herdboy and the Spinning Maiden.
       Turning to Hyōgo, Otsū said, "He seems to have a letter for Sukekurō."
       "He's wandered off in the wrong direction, hasn't he? Fortunately, it's not
very far." Calling Iori to him, he gave him directions. "Go along this river to the

first crossroads, then go left and up the hill. When you get to a place where three
roads come together, you'll see a pair of large pine trees off to your right. The
house is to the left, across the road."
       "And watch out you don't get possessed by a fox again," added Otsū.
       Iori had regained his confidence. "Thanks," he called back, already
running along the river. When he reached the crossroads, he half turned and
shouted, "To the left here?"
       "That's it," answered Hyōgo. "The road's dark, so be careful." He and Otsū
stood watching from the bridge for a minute or two. "What a strange child," he
said.
       "Yes, but he seems rather bright." In her mind she was comparing him with
Jōtarō, who had been only a little bigger than Iori when she had last seen him.
Jōtarō, she reflected, must be seventeen now. She wondered what he was like
and felt an inevitable pang of yearning for Musashi. So many years since she'd
had any word of him! Though now accustomed to living with the suffering that
love entails, she dared hope that leaving Edo might bring her closer to him, that
she might even meet him somewhere along the road.
       "Let's get on," Hyōgo said brusquely, to himself as much as to Otsū.
"There's nothing to be done about tonight, but we'll have to be careful not to
waste any more time."
