Slaughter by the Riverside


      Life under Yajibei's half-tiled roof agreed so much with Osugi that a year
and a half later she was still there. After the first few weeks, during which she
rested and recovered her health, hardly a day passed without her telling herself
she should be on her way.
      Whenever she broached the subject to Yajibei, whom she didn't see often,
he urged her to stay on. "What's the hurry?" he would ask. "There's no reason for
you to go anywhere. Bide your time until we find Musashi. Then we can serve as
your seconds." Yajibei knew nothing of Osugi's enemy except what she herself
had told him—that he was, in so many words, the blackest of blackguards—but
since the day of her arrival, all of his men had been under instructions to report
immediately anything they heard or saw of Musashi.
      After initially detesting Edo, Osugi had mellowed in attitude to the point
where she was willing to admit that the people were "friendly, carefree and really
very kind at heart."
      The Hangawara household was a particularly easygoing place and
something of a haven for social misfits; country boys too lazy to farm, displaced
rōnin, profligates who had run through their parents' money and tattooed ex-
convicts made up a coarse and motley crew, whose unifying esprit de corps
curiously resembled that of a well-run school for warriors. The ideal here,
however, was blustering masculinity rather than spiritual manliness; it was really
a "dōjō" for thugs.
      As in the martial arts dōjō, there was a rigid class structure. Under the
boss, who was the ultimate temporal and spiritual authority, came a group of
seniors, usually referred to as the "elder brothers." Below them were the ordinary
henchmen—the kobun—whose ranking was determined largely by length of
service. There was also a special class of "guests"; their status depended on such
factors as their ability with weapons. Bolstering the hierarchical organization
was a code of etiquette, of uncertain origin but strictly adhered to.
      At one point, Yajibei, thinking Osugi might be bored, suggested that she
take care of the younger men. Since then, her days had been fully occupied with
sewing, mending, washing and straightening up after the kobun, whose
slovenliness gave her plenty of work.

       For all their lack of breeding, the kobun recognized quality when they saw
it. They admired both Osugi's spartan habits and the efficiency with which she
went about her chores. "She's a real samurai lady," they were wont to say. "The
House of Hon'iden must have very good blood in it."
       Osugi's unlikely host treated her with consideration and had even built her
separate living quarters on the vacant lot behind his house. And whenever he
was at home, he went to pay his respects each morning and evening. When asked
by one of his underlings why he displayed such deference toward a stranger,
Yajibei confessed that he had acted very badly toward his own father and mother
while they were still alive. "At my age," he said, "I feel I have a filial duty to all
older people."
       Spring came, and the wild plum blossoms fell, but the city itself had as yet
almost no cherry blossoms. Apart from a few trees in the sparsely settled hills to
the west, there were only the saplings that Buddhists had planted along the road
leading to the Sensōji, in Asakusa. Rumor had it that this year they were
sprouting buds and would blossom for the first time.
       One day Yajibei came to Osugi's room and said, "I'm going to the Sensōji.
Do you feel like coming along?"
       "I'd love to. That temple's dedicated to Kanzeon, and I'm a great believer
in her powers. She's the same bodhisattva as the Kannon I prayed to at
Kiyomizudera in Kyoto."
       With Yajibei and Osugi went two of the kobun, Jūrō and Koroku. Jūrō bore
the nickname "Reed Mat," for reasons no one knew, but it was obvious why
Koroku was called the "Acolyte." He was a small, compact man with a distinctly
benign face, if one overlooked the three ugly scars on his forehead, evidence of a
proclivity for street brawls.
       They first made their way to the moat at Kyōbashi, where boats were
available for hire. After Koroku had skillfully sculled them out of the moat and
into the Sumida River, Yajibei ordered the box lunches opened.
       "I'm going to the temple today," he explained, "because it's the anniversary
of my mother's death. I really should go back home and visit her grave, but it's
too far, so I compromise by going to the Sensōji and making a donation. But
that's neither here nor there; just think of it as a picnic." He reached over the side
of the boat, rinsed off a sake cup and offered it to Osugi.
       "It's very fine of you to remember your mother," she said as she accepted
the cup, all the while wondering fretfully if Matahachi would do the same when
she was gone. "I wonder, though, is drinking sake on the anniversary of your

poor mother's passing the thing to do?"
       "Well, I'd rather do that than hold some pompous ceremony. Anyway, I
believe in the Buddha; that's all that counts for ignorant louts like me. You know
the saying, don't you? 'He who has faith need have no knowledge.' "
       Osugi, letting it go at that, proceeded to have several refills. After a time
she remarked, "I haven't drunk like this for ages. I feel like I'm floating on air."
       "Drink up," urged Yajibei. "It's good sake, isn't it? Don't worry about being
out on the water. We're here to take care of you."
       The river, flowing south from the town of Sumida, was broad and placid.
On the Shimōsa side, the east bank opposite Edo, stood a luxuriant forest. Tree
roots jutting into the water formed nests holding limpid pools, which shone like
sapphires in the sunlight.
     "Oh," said Osugi. "Listen to the nightingales!"
     "When the rainy season comes, you can hear cuckoos all day long."
     "Let me pour for you. I hope you don't mind my joining in your
     celebration."
     "I like to see you having a good time."
     From the stern, Koroku called out lustily, "Say, boss, how about passing the
     sake around?"
     "Just pay attention to your work. If you start now, we'll all drown. On the
     way back you can have all you want."
     "If you say so. But I just want you to know the whole river's beginning to
     look like sake."
     "Stop thinking about it. Here, pull over to that boat next to the bank so we
     can buy some fresh fish."
       Koroku did as he was told. After a bit of haggling, the fisherman, flashing
a happy smile, lifted the cover off a tank built into the deck and told them to take
anything they wanted. Osugi had never seen anything like it. The tank was full to
the brim with wriggling, flapping fish, some from the sea, some from the river.
Carp, prawns, catfish, black porgies, gobies. Even trout and sea bass.
       Yajibei sprinkled soy sauce on some whitebait and began eating it raw. He
offered some to Osugi, but she declined, with a look of dread on her face.
     When they drew up on the west side of the river and disembarked, Osugi
     seemed a little wobbly on her feet.
     "Be careful," warned Yajibei. "Here, take my hand."
     "No, thank you. I don't need any help." She waved her own hand before her
     face indignantly.

      After Jūrō and Koroku had moored the boat, the four of them crossed a
      broad expanse of stones and puddles to get to the riverbank proper.
      A group of small children were busily turning over stones, but seeing the
      unusual foursome, they stopped and flocked around, chattering excitedly.
      "Buy some, sir. Please."
      "Won't you buy some, Granny?"
      Yajibei seemed to like children; at least, he showed no signs of annoyance.
      "What have you got there—crabs?"
      "Not crabs; arrowheads," they cried, producing handfuls of them from their
      kimonos.
      "Arrowheads?"
       "That's right. A lot of men and horses are buried in a mound by the temple.
People coming here buy arrowheads to offer to the dead. You should too."
       "I don't think I want any arrowheads, but I'll give you some money. How'll
that do?"
       That, it appeared, would do admirably, and as soon as Yajibei had passed
out a few coins, the children ran off to resume their digging. But even as he
watched, a man emerged from a thatched-roof house nearby, took the coins away
from them and went back inside. Yajibei clicked his tongue and turned away in
disgust.
       Osugi was gazing out over the river, fascination in her eyes. "If there are a
lot of arrowheads lying around," she observed, "there must have been a big
battle."
       "I don't really know, but it seems there were quite a few battles here in the
days when Edo was only a provincial estate. That was four or five hundred years
ago. I've heard that Minamoto no Yoritomo came up here from Izu to organize
troops in the twelfth century. When the Imperial Court was divided—when was
that, fourteenth century?—Lord Nitta of Musashi was defeated by the Ashikagas
somewhere in the neighborhood. Just in the last couple of centuries, Ōta Dōkan
and other local generals are said to have fought many battles not far up the
river."
       While they were talking, Jūrō and Koroku went on ahead to make a place
for them to sit on the veranda of the temple.
       The Sensōji turned out to be a terrible disappointment to Osugi. In her eyes
it was nothing more than a large, run-down house, the priest's residence a mere
shack. "Is this it?" she wanted to know, with more than a hint of deprecation.
"After all I've heard about the Sensōji . . ."

      The setting was a splendidly primeval forest of large, ancient trees, but not
only did the Kanzeon hall look shabby; when the river flooded, the water came
through the woods right up to the veranda. Even at other times, small tributaries
washed over the grounds.
      "Welcome. Good to see you again."
      Glancing up in surprise, Osugi saw a priest kneeling on the roof. "Working
on the roof?" asked Yajibei amiably.
      "Have to, because of the birds. The oftener I mend it, the oftener they steal
the thatch to make nests with. There's always a leak somewhere. Make
yourselves comfortable. I'll be down shortly."
      Yajibei and Osugi picked up votive candles and went into the dim interior.
"No wonder it leaks," she thought, looking at the starlike holes above her.
      Kneeling beside Yajibei, she took out her prayer beads and with a dreamy
look in her eye chanted the Vow of Kanzeon from the Lotus Sutra.


      You will reside in the air like the sun.
      And if you are pursued by evil men
      And pushed off the Diamond Mountain,
      Reflect on the power of Kanzeon
      And you will not lose a hair from your head.
      And if bandits surround you
      And threaten you with swords,
      If you reflect on the power of Kanzeon,
      The bandits will take pity on you.
      And if the king sentences you to death
      And the sword is about to behead you,
      Reflect on the power of Kanzeon.
      The sword will break into pieces.


      She recited softly at first, but as she became oblivious to the presence of
Yajibei, Jūrō and Koroku, her voice rose and grew resonant; a rapt expression
came to her face.


      The eighty-four thousand sentient beings

      Began to aspire in their hearts
      For anuttara-samyak-sambodhi,
      The unsurpassed Wisdom of the Buddhas.


       Prayer beads trembling in her fingers, Osugi went without a break from the
recitation into a personal supplication of her own.


      Hail to Kanzeon, World-Honored One!
      Hail to the Bodhisattva of Infinite Mercy and Infinite Compassion!
      Look favorably on this old woman's one wish.
      Let me strike Musashi down, and very soon!
      Let me strike him down!
      Let me strike him down!


       Abruptly lowering her voice, she bowed to the floor. "And make
Matahachi a good boy! Cause the House of Hon'iden to prosper!"
       After the long prayer ended, there was a moment's silence before the priest
invited them outside to have some tea. Yajibei and the two younger men, who
had knelt in proper fashion throughout the invocation, got up rubbing their tingly
legs and went out on the veranda.
       "I can have some sake now, can't I?" Jūrō asked eagerly. Permission
having been granted, he hastened to the priest's house and arranged their lunch
on the porch. By the time the others joined him, he was sipping sake with one
hand and broiling the fish they had bought with the other. "Who cares if there
aren't any cherry blossoms?" he remarked. "Feels just like a flower-viewing
picnic anyway."
       Yajibei handed the priest an offering, delicately wrapped in paper, and told
him to use it for the roof repairs. As he did so, he happened to notice a row of
wooden plaques on which were written donors' names, together with the
amounts they had contributed. Nearly all were about the same as Yajibei's, some
less, but one stood out conspicuously. "Ten gold coins, Daizō of Narai, Province
of Shinano."
       Turning to the priest, Yajibei remarked, somewhat diffidently, "Perhaps it's
crass of me to say so, but ten gold coins is a considerable sum. Is this Daizō of

Narai as rich as all that?"
       "I really couldn't say. He appeared out of the blue one day toward the end
of last year and said it was a disgrace that the most famous temple in the Kanto
district was in such had shape. He told me the money should be added to our
fund for buying lumber."
       "Sounds like an admirable sort of man."
       "He also donated three gold coins to Yushima Shrine and no fewer than
twenty to Kanda Myōjin Shrine. He wanted the latter to be kept in good
condition because it enshrines the spirit of Taira no Masakado. Daizō insists that
Masakado was not a rebel. He thinks he should be revered as the pioneer who
opened up the eastern part of the country. You'll find there are some very unusual
donors in this world."
       Hardly had he finished speaking when a crowd of children came running
helter-skelter toward them.
       "What're you doing here?" shouted the priest sternly. "If you want to play,
go down by the river. You mustn't run wild in the temple grounds."
      But the children swept on like a school of minnows until they reached the
      veranda.
      "Come quick," cried one. "It's awful!"
      "There's a samurai down there. He's fighting."
      "One man against four."
      "Real swords!"
       "Praise to Buddha, not again!" lamented the priest as he hurriedly slipped
on his sandals. Before running off, he took a moment to explain. "Forgive me.
I'll have to leave you for a while. The riverbank is a favorite place for fights.
Every time I turn around, somebody's down there cutting people to pieces or
beating them to a pulp. Then men from the magistrate's office come to me for a
written report. I'll have to go see what it is this time."
       "A fight?" chorused Yajibei and his men, and off they raced. Osugi
followed but was so much slower on her feet that by the time she got there the
fight was over. The children and some onlookers from a nearby fishing village
all stood around in silence, swallowing hard and looking pale.
       At first Osugi thought the silence strange, but then she, too, caught her
breath, and her eyes opened wide. Across the ground flitted the shadow of a
swallow. Walking toward them was a young, smug-faced samurai clad in a
purplish-red warrior's cloak. Whether or not he noticed the spectators, he paid
them no heed.

       Osugi's gaze shifted to four bodies lying in a tangle some twenty paces
behind the samurai.
       The victor paused. As he did so, a low gasp went up from several lips, for
one of the vanquished had moved. Struggling to his feet, he cried, "Wait! You
can't run away."
       The samurai assumed a waiting stance while the wounded man ran
forward, gasping, "This ... fight's ... not over yet."
       When he leapt weakly to the attack, the samurai retreated a step, allowing
the man to stumble forward. Then he struck. The man's head split in two. "Now
is it over?" he shouted viciously.
       No one had even seen the Drying Pole drawn.
       Having wiped off his blade, he stooped to wash his hands in the river.
Though the villagers were accustomed to fights, they were astonished at the
samurai's sangfroid. The last man's death had been not only instantaneous but
inhumanly cruel. Not a word was uttered.
       The samurai stood up and stretched. "It's just like the Iwakuni River," he
said. "Reminds me of home." For a few moments he gazed idly at the wide
stream and a flock of white-bellied swallows swooping and skimming the water.
Then he turned and walked rapidly downstream.
       He made straight for Yajibei's boat, but as he began untying it, Jūrō and
Koroku came running out of the forest.
       "Wait! What do you think you're doing?" shouted Jūrō, who was now close
enough to see the blood on the samurai's hakama and sandal thongs but took no
notice of it.
       Dropping the rope, the samurai grinned and asked, "Can't I use the boat?"
"Of course not," snapped Jūrō.
       "Suppose I paid to use it?"
       "Don't talk nonsense." The voice brusquely refusing the samurai's request
was Jūrō's, but in a sense, it was the whole brash new city of Edo speaking
fearlessly through his mouth.
       The samurai did not apologize, but neither did he resort to force. He turned
and walked off without another word.
       "Kojirō! Kojirō! Wait!" Osugi called at the top of her lungs.
       When Kojirō saw who it was, the grimness vanished from his face and he
broke into a friendly smile. "Why, what are you doing here? I've been wondering
what happened to you."
       "I'm here to pay my respects to Kanzeon. I came with Hangawara Yajibei

and these two young men. Yajibei's letting me stay at his house in Bakurōchō."
      "When was it I saw you last? Let's see—Mount Hiei. You said then you
were going to Edo, so I thought I might run into you. I hardly expected it to be
here." He glanced at Jūrō and Koroku, who were in a state of shock. "You mean
those two there?"
      "Oh, they're just a couple of ruffians, but their boss is a very fine man."
      Yajibei was just as thunderstruck as everybody else to see his guest
chatting amiably with the awesome samurai. He was on the spot in no time,
bowing to Kojirō and saying, "I'm afraid my boys spoke very rudely to you, sir. I
hope you'll forgive them. We're just ready to leave. Perhaps you'd like to ride
downstream with us."
