A Gift of Money


       Musashi's first waking thought was of Otsū and Jōtarō, and though he and
Geki carried on a convivial conversation over breakfast, the problem of how to
find them was very much on his mind. After emerging from the inn, he
unconsciously scrutinized every face he encountered on the highroad. Once or
twice he thought he saw Otsū ahead, only to find he was mistaken.
       "You seem to be looking for someone," said Geki.
       "I am. My companions and I got separated along the way, and I'm worried
about them. I think I'd better give up the idea of going to Edo with you and
search some of the other roads."
       Disappointed, Geki said, "That's too bad. I was looking forward to
traveling with you. I hope the fact that I talked too much last night won't change
your mind about visiting Sendai."
       Geki's manner, straightforward and masculine, appealed to Musashi.
"That's very kind of you," he said. "I hope I have the chance someday."
       "I want you to see for yourself how our samurai conduct themselves. And
if you're not interested in that, then just regard it as a sightseeing trip. You can
listen to the local songs and visit Matsushima. It's famous for its scenery, you
know." Geki took his leave and headed briskly for Wada Pass.
       Musashi turned around and went back to where the Kōshū highroad
branched off from the Nakasendō. As he stood there mapping out his strategy, a
group of day laborers from Suwa came up to him. Their dress suggested they
were porters or grooms or bearers of the primitive palanquins used in these parts.
They approached slowly, arms folded, looking like an army of crabs.
       As their eyes rudely sized him up, one of them said, "Sir, you seem to be
looking for someone. A beautiful lady, is it, or only a servant?"
       Musashi shook his head, waved them off with a slightly disdainful gesture
and turned away. He did not know whether to go east or west, but finally made
up his mind to spend the day seeing what he could find out in the neighborhood.
If his inquiries led nowhere, he could then proceed to the shōgun's capital with a
clear conscience.
       One of the laborers broke in upon his thoughts. "If you're looking for
somebody, we could help you," he said. "It's better than standing around under

the hot sun. What does your friend look like?"
       Another added, "We won't even set a rate for our services. We'll leave it up
to you."
       Musashi relented to the extent of describing Otsū and Jōtarō in detail.
       After consulting with his fellows, the first man said, "We haven't seen
them, but if we split up we're sure to find them. The kidnappers must've taken
one of the three roads between Suwa and Shiojiri. You don't know this area, but
we do."
       None too optimistic about his chances of success in such difficult terrain,
Musashi said, "All right, go look for them."
       "Done," shouted the men.
       Again they huddled, ostensibly deciding who was to go where. Then the
ringleader came forward, rubbing his hands together deferentially. "There's just
one little thing, sir. You see ... I don't like to mention it, but we're just penniless
laborers. Why, not one of us has had anything to eat yet today. Wonder if you
couldn't advance us half a day's pay and, say, a little something extra. I guarantee
we'll find your companions before sundown."
       "Of course. I was planning to give you something."
       The man named a figure, which Musashi found, after counting his money,
was more than he had. He was not unmindful of the value of money, but being
alone, with no one to support, his attitude was on the whole indifferent. Friends
and admirers sometimes donated travel funds, and there were temples where he
could often obtain free lodging. At other times, he slept in the open or went
without ordinary food. One way or another, he had always managed to get by.
       On this trip, he had left the finances to Otsū, who had received a sizable
gift of travel money from Lord Karasumaru. She had been paying the bills and
giving him a certain amount of spending money each morning, as any ordinary
housewife might do.
       Keeping only a little for himself, he distributed the rest of his money
among the men, and though they'd expected more, they agreed to undertake the
search as a "special favor."
       "Wait for us by the two-story gate of the Suwa Myōjin Shrine," the
spokesman advised. "By evening we'll be back with some news." They made off
in several directions.
       Rather than waste the day doing nothing, Musashi went to see Takashima
Castle and the town of Shimosuwa, stopping here and there to note features of
the local topography, which might come in handy at some future date, and to

observe the methods of irrigation. He asked several times whether there were
any outstanding military experts in the area, but heard nothing of interest.
       As sundown drew near, he went to the shrine and sat down, tired and
dispirited, on the stone stairway leading up to the two-story gate. No one showed
up, so he took a turn around the spacious shrine grounds. But when he returned
to the gate, there was still no one there.
       Though not loud, the sound of horses stamping the ground began to get on
his nerves. Descending the steps, he came upon a shed, obscured by the trees,
where an ancient horsekeeper was feeding the shrine's sacred white horse.
       He glanced at Musashi accusingly. "Can I help you?" he asked brusquely.
"Do you have some business with the shrine?"
       Upon hearing why Musashi was there, he broke out in uncontrollable
laughter. Musashi, seeing nothing at all funny about his predicament, made no
attempt to conceal a scowl. Before he spoke, however, the old man said, "You've
no business being on the road by yourself. You're too innocent. Did you really
believe roadside vermin would spend the whole day looking for your friends? If
you paid them in advance, you'll never see them again."
       "You mean you think they were just putting on an act when they divided
up and left?"
       The horsekeeper's expression changed to one of sympathy. "You've been
robbed!" he said. "I heard there were about ten vagrants drinking and gambling
in the grove on the other side of the mountain all day today. They're most likely
the ones. These things happen all the time." He went on to tell some stories of
travelers being cheated out of their money by unscrupulous laborers, but
concluded mildly, "That's the way the world is. You'd better be more careful
from now on."
       With this sage advice, he picked up his empty pail and departed, leaving
Musashi feeling foolish. "It's too late to do anything now," he sighed. "I pride
myself on my ability not to give my opponent any opening, and then get taken in
by a gang of illiterate workmen!" This evidence of his gullibility came like a slap
in the face. Such lapses could easily muddy his practice of the Art of War. How
could a man so easily deceived by his inferiors effectively command an army?
As he climbed slowly toward the gate, he resolved to henceforth pay more
attention to the ways of the world about him.
       One of the laborers was peering around in the dark, and as soon as he
caught sight of Musashi, he called to him and ran partway down the steps.
       "Glad I found you, sir," he said. "I've got news about one of the people

you're looking for."
       "Oh?" Musashi, having just reprimanded himself for his naiveté, was
astonished but gratified to know that not everyone in the world was a swindler.
"By one of them, do you mean the boy or the woman?"
       "The boy. He's with Daizō of Narai, and I've found out where Daizō is, or
at least where he's headed."
       "Where might that be?"
       "I didn't think that bunch I was with this morning would do what they
promised. They took the day off to gamble, but I felt sorry for you. I went from
Shiojiri to Seba, asking everybody I ran into. Nobody knew anything about the
girl, but I heard from the maid at the inn where I ate that Daizō passed through
Suwa about noon today on his way to Wada Pass. She said he had a young boy
with him."
       Embarrassed, Musashi said rather formally, "It was good of you to let me
know." He took out his money pouch, knowing it contained only enough for his
own meal. He hesitated a moment, but reflecting that honesty should not go
unrewarded, gave the laborer his last bit of cash.
       Pleased with the tip, the man raised the money to his forehead in a gesture
of thanks and went happily on his way.
       Watching his money go down the road, Musashi felt he had used it for a
purpose worthier than that of filling his stomach. Perhaps the laborer, having
learned that right conduct can be profitable, would go out on the road the next
day and help another traveler.
       It was already dark, but he decided that instead of sleeping under the eaves
of some peasant's house, he would cross Wada Pass. By traveling all night, he
should be able to catch up with Daizō. He started off, savoring once again the
satisfaction of being on a deserted road at night. Something about it appealed to
his nature. Counting his footsteps, listening to the silent voice of the heavens
above, he could forget everything and rejoice in his own being. When he was
surrounded by crowds of busy people, his spirit often seemed sad and isolated,
but now he felt alive and buoyant. He could think about life coolly and
objectively, even appraise himself as he might appraise a total stranger.
       A little after midnight, his musings were distracted by a light in the
distance. He had been climbing steadily since crossing the bridge over the
Ochiai River. One pass was behind him; the next one, at Wada, loomed up in the
starry sky ahead, and beyond that the even higher crossing at Daimon. The light
was in a hollow that ran parallel to the two ridges.

       "It looks like a bonfire," he thought, feeling pangs of hunger for the first
time in hours. "Maybe they'll let me dry off my sleeves, give me a bit of gruel or
something."
       As he drew near, he saw that it wasn't an outdoor fire but the light from a
small roadside teahouse. There were four or five stakes for tying horses, but no
horses. It seemed incredible that there would be anyone in such a place at this
hour, yet he could hear the sound of raucous voices mingling with the crackling
of the fire. He stood hesitantly under the eaves for a few minutes. If it had been a
farmer's or a woodcutter's hut, he would have had no qualms about asking for
shelter and some leftovers, but this was a place of business.
       The smell of food made him hungrier than ever. The warm smoke
enveloped him; he could not tear himself away. "Well, if I explain my situation
to them, maybe they'll accept the statue as payment." The "statue" was the small
image of Kannon he had carved from the wood of an ancient plum tree.
       When he barged into the shop, the startled customers stopped talking. The
interior was simple, a dirt floor with a hearth and fire hood in the middle, around
which huddled three men on stools. Stewing in a pot was a mixture of boar's
meat and giant radish. A jar of sake was warming in the ashes. Standing with his
back to them, slicing pickles and chatting good-naturedly, was the proprietor.
       "What do you want?" asked one of the customers, a keen-eyed man with
long sideburns.
       Too hungry to hear, Musashi passed by the men and, seating himself on the
edge of a stool, said to the proprietor, "Give me something to eat, quick. Rice
and pickles'll do. Anything."
       The man poured some of the stew over a bowl of cold rice and set it before
him. "Are you planning to cross the pass tonight?" he asked.
       "Um," mumbled Musashi, who had already seized some chopsticks and
was attacking the food with gusto. After his second mouthful, he asked, "Do you
know if a man named Daizō—he comes from Narai—passed here this afternoon,
going toward the pass? He has a young boy with him."
       "I'm afraid I can't help you." Then, to the other men, "Tōji, did you or your
friends see an older man traveling with a boy?"
       After a bit of whispering, the three replied in the negative, shaking their
heads in unison.
       Musashi, filled and warmed by the hot food, began to worry about the bill.
He'd hesitated discussing it with the proprietor first, due to the presence of the
other men, but he didn't for a moment feel he was begging. It had simply seemed

more important to tend to his stomach's needs first. He made up his mind that if
the shopkeeper would not accept the statue, he'd offer him his dagger.
        "I'm sorry to have to tell you this," he began, "but I don't have any cash at
all. I'm not asking for a free meal, mind you. I have something here to offer in
payment, if you'll take it."
       With unexpected amiability, the proprietor replied, "I'm sure that'll be all
       right. What is it?"
       "A statue of Kannon."
       "A real statue?"
        "Oh, it's not the work of a famous sculptor—just something I carved
myself. It may not be worth even the price of a bowl of rice, but take a look at it
anyway."
        As he began untying the cords of his bag, the one he had carried for years,
the three men left off drinking and focused their attention on his hands. Besides
the statue, the bag contained a single change of underwear and a writing set.
When he emptied out the contents, something fell with a clunk to the ground.
The others gasped, for the object that lay at Musashi's feet was a money pouch,
from which several gold and silver coins had spilled out. Musashi himself stared
in speechless amazement.
        "Where did that come from?" he wondered.
        The other men craned their necks to gape at the treasure.
        Feeling something else in the bag, Musashi pulled out a letter. It consisted
of a single line, saying, "This should take care of your travel expenses for the
time being," and was signed "Geki."
        Musashi had a pretty clear idea of what it meant: it was Geki's way of
trying to buy his services for Lord Date Masamune of Sendai and Aoba Castle.
The increasing probability of a final clash between the Tokugawas and the
Toyotomis made it imperative for the great daimyō to maintain sizable numbers
of able fighters. A favorite method used in the cutthroat competition for the few
really outstanding samurai was to attempt to get such men in debt, even for a
small sum, and then forge a tacit agreement for future cooperation.
        It was common knowledge that Toyotomi Hideyori was providing large
sums of money to Gotō Matabei and Sanada Yukimura. Though Yukimura was
ostensibly in retirement on Mount Kudo, so much gold and silver was being sent
to him from Osaka Castle that Ieyasu had undertaken a full-scale investigation.
Since the personal requirements of a retired general living in a hermitage were
fairly modest, it was all but certain that the money was being passed on to

several thousand indigent rōnin, who were idling away their time in nearby
towns and cities waiting for the outbreak of hostilities.
       Finding an able warrior, as Geki believed he had, and somehow enticing
him into his lord's service was one of the most valuable services a retainer could
perform. And it was for just this reason that Musashi had no interest in Geki's
money: using it would incur an unwanted obligation. In a matter of seconds, he
decided to ignore the gift, to pretend it did not exist.
       Without a word he reached down, picked up the pouch and restored it to
his bag. Addressing the proprietor as though nothing had happened, he said, "All
right then, I'll leave the statue here in payment."
       But the man balked. "I can't accept that now, sir!"
       "Is there something wrong with it? I don't claim to be a sculptor, but—"
       "Oh, it's not bad, and I would have taken it if you didn't have any money,
like you said, but you've got plenty. Why do you throw your cash around for
people to see if you want them to think you're broke?"
       The other customers, sobered and thrilled by the sight of the gold,
vigorously nodded their agreement. Musashi, recognizing the futility of arguing
that the money was not his, took out a piece of silver and handed it to the man.
       "This is far too much, sir," complained the proprietor. "Don't you have
anything smaller?"
       A cursory examination revealed some variation in the worth of the pieces,
but nothing less valuable. "Don't worry about the change," Musashi said. "You
can keep it."
       No longer able to maintain the fiction that the money didn't exist, Musashi
tucked the pouch into his stomach wrapper for safekeeping.
       Then, despite urgings to linger awhile, he shouldered his pack and went
out into the night. Having eaten and restored his strength, he calculated that he
could make it to Daimon Pass by sunrise. By day, he would have seen around
him an abundance of highland flowers—rhododendrons, gentians, wild
chrysanthemums—but at night there in the immense sea of darkness he could see
only a cottonlike mist clinging to the earth.
       He was about two miles from the teahouse when one of the men he'd seen
there hailed him, saying, "Wait! You forgot something." Catching up with
Musashi, the man puffed, "My, you walk fast! After you left, I found this money,
so I brought it to you. It must be yours."
       He held out a piece of silver, which Musashi refused, saying it certainly
wasn't his. The man insisted that it was. "It must have rolled into the corner

when you dropped your money pouch."
        Not having counted the money, Musashi was in no position to prove the
man wrong. With a word of thanks, he took the silver and put it in his kimono
sleeve. Yet for some reason he found himself unmoved by this display of
honesty.
       Though the man's errand had been completed, he fell in alongside Musashi
       and began making small talk.
       "Perhaps I shouldn't ask, but are you studying swordsmanship under a well-
       known teacher?"
       "No. I use my own style."
        The perfunctory answer failed to discourage the man, who declared that he
had been a samurai himself, adding, "But for the time being I'm reduced to living
here in the mountains."
        "Is that so?"
        "Um. Those two back there too. We were all samurai. Now we make our
living cutting trees and gathering herbs. We're like the proverbial dragon biding
its time in a pond. I can't pretend to be Sano Genzaemon, but when the time
comes, I'll grab my old sword and put on my threadbare armor and go fight for
some famous daimyō. I'm just waiting for that day to come!"
       "Are you for Osaka or Edo?"
       "Doesn't matter. The main thing is to be on somebody's side, or else I'll
       waste my life hanging around here."
       Musashi laughed politely. "Thanks for bringing the money."
        Then, in an effort to lose the man, he started taking long, rapid strides. The
man stayed right beside him, step for step. He also kept pressing in on Musashi's
left side, an encroachment that any experienced swordsman would regard as
suspicious. Rather than reveal his wariness, however, Musashi did nothing to
protect his left side, leaving it wide open.
        The man became increasingly friendly. "May I make a suggestion? If you'd
like, why don't you come spend the night at our place? After Wada Pass, you've
still got Daimon ahead of you. You might make it by morning, but it's very steep
—a difficult road for a man not familiar with these parts."
        "Thanks. I think I'll take you up on that."
        "You should, you should. Only thing is, we don't have anything to offer in
the way of food or entertainment."
        "I'd be happy to have a place to lie down. Where is your house?" "About a
half mile off to the left and a little higher up."

      "You really are deep in the mountains, aren't you?"
      "As I said, until the proper time comes, we're lying low, gathering herbs,
hunting, doing things like that. I share a house with the other two men." "Now
that you mention it, what became of them?"
      "They're probably still drinking. Every time we go there, they get drunk,
and I wind up lugging them home. Tonight I decided to just leave them... . Watch
out! There's a sharp drop there—stream down below. It's dangerous."
      "Do we cross the stream?"
      "Yes. It's narrow here, and there's a log across it just below us. After we
cross, we turn right and climb up along the riverbank."
      Musashi sensed that the man had stopped walking, but he did not look
back. He found the log and started across. A moment later, the man leaped
forward and lifted the end of the log in an attempt to throw Musashi into the
stream.
      "What are you up to?"
      The shout came from below, but the man jerked his head upward in
astonishment. Musashi, having anticipated his treacherous move, had already
jumped from the log and lit as lightly as a wagtail on a large rock. His startled
attacker dropped the log into the stream. Before the curtain of flying water had
fallen back to earth, Musashi had jumped back onto the bank, sword unsheathed,
and cut his assailant down. It all happened so quickly that the man did not even
see Musashi draw.
      The corpse wriggled for a moment or two before subsiding into stillness.
Musashi did not deign to give it a glance. He had already taken a new stance in
preparation for the next attack, for he was sure there would be one. As he steeled
himself for it, his hair stood up like an eagle's crown feathers.
      A short silence ensued, followed by a boom loud enough to split the gorge
asunder. The gunshot seemed to have come from somewhere on the other side.
Musashi dodged, and the well-aimed slug hissed through the space he had been
occupying, burying itself in the embankment behind him. Falling as though
wounded, Musashi looked across to the opposite side, where he saw red sparks
flying through the air like so many fireflies. He could just make out two figures
creeping cautiously forward.
