Filial Piety


       "What're you doing, Granny, practicing your handwriting?" Jūrō the Reed
Mat's expression was ambiguous; it might have been admiration, or simply
shock.
       "Oh, it's you," said Osugi with a trace of annoyance.
       Sitting down beside her, Jūrō mumbled, "Copying a Buddhist sutra, are
you?" This elicited no reply. "Aren't you old enough so you don't have to
practice your writing anymore? Or are you thinking of becoming a calligraphy
teacher in the next world?"
       "Be quiet. To copy the holy scriptures, one has to achieve a state of
selflessness. Solitude is best for that. Why don't you go away?"
       "After I hurried home just to tell you what happened to me today?" "It can
wait."
       "When will you be finished?"
       "I have to put the spirit of the Buddha's enlightenment into each character I
write. It takes me three days to make one copy."
       "You've got a lot of patience."
       "Three days is nothing. This summer I'm going to make dozens of copies.
I've made a vow to make a thousand before I die. I'll leave them to people who
don't have proper love for their parents."
       "A thousand copies? That's a lot."
       "It's my sacred vow."
       "Well, I'm not very proud of it, but I guess I've been disrespectful to my
parents, like the rest of these louts around here. They forgot about them a long
time ago. The only one who cares for his mother and father is the boss."
       "It's a sad world we live in."
       "Ha, ha. If it upsets you that much, you must have a good-for-nothing son
too."
       "I'm sorry to say, mine has caused me a lot of grief. That's why I took the
vow. This is the Sutra on the Great Love of Parents. Everyone who doesn't treat
his mother or father right should be forced to read it."
       "You're really giving a copy of whatever-you-call-it to a thousand people?"
       "They say that by planting one seed of enlightenment you can convert a

hundred people, and if one sprout of enlightenment grows in a hundred hearts,
ten million souls can be saved." Laying down her brush, she took a finished copy
and handed it to Jūrō. "Here, you can have this. See that you read it when you
have time."
       She looked so pious Jūrō nearly burst out laughing, but he managed to
contain himself. Overcoming his urge to stuff it into his kimono like so much
tissue paper, he lifted it respectfully to his forehead and placed it on his lap.
       "Say, Granny, you sure you wouldn't like to know what happened today?
Maybe your faith in the Buddha gets results. I ran into somebody pretty special."
       "Who might that be?"
       "Miyamoto Musashi. I saw him down at the Sumida River, getting off the
ferry."
       "You saw Musashi? Why didn't you say so!" She pushed the writing table
away with a grunt. "Are you sure? Where is he now?"
       "There, now, take it easy. Your old Jūrō doesn't do things halfway. After I
found out who he was, I followed him without him knowing it. He went to an
inn in Bakurōchō."
       "He's staying near here?"
       "Well, it's not all that close."
       "It may not seem that way to you, but it does to me. I've been all over the
country looking for him." Springing to her feet, she went to her clothes cabinet
and took out the short sword that had been in her family for generations.
      "Take me there," she ordered.
      "Now?"
      "Of course now."
       "I thought you had a lot of patience, but ... Why do you have to go now?"
"I'm always ready to meet Musashi, even on a moment's notice. If I get killed,
you can send my body back to my family in Mimasaka."
       "Couldn't you wait until the boss comes home? If we go off like this, all I'll
get for finding Musashi is a bawling out."
       "But there's no telling when Musashi might go somewhere else." "Don't
worry about that. I sent a man to keep an eye on the place." "Can you guarantee
Musashi won't get away?"
       "What? I do you a favor, and you want to tie me up with obligations! Oh,
all right. I guarantee it. Absolutely. Look, Granny, now's the time when you
should be taking it easy, sitting down copying sutras or something like that."
      "Where is Yajibei?"

      "He's on a trip to Chichibu with his religious group. I don't know exactly
      when he'll be back."
      "I can't afford to wait."
      "If that's the way it is, why don't we get Sasaki Kojirō to come over? You
      can talk to him about it."
       The next morning, after contacting his spy, Jūrō informed Osugi that
Musashi had moved from the inn to the house of a sword polisher.
       "See? I told you," declared Osugi. "You can't expect him to sit still in one
place forever. The next thing you know, he'll be gone again." She was seated at
her writing table but hadn't written a word all morning.
       "Musashi hasn't got wings," Jūrō assured her. "Just be calm. Koroku's
going to see Kojirō today."
       "Today? Didn't you send somebody last night? Tell me where he lives. I'll
go myself."
       She started getting ready to go out, but Jūrō suddenly disappeared and she
had to ask a couple of the other henchmen for directions. Having seldom left the
house during her more than two years in Edo, she was quite unfamiliar with the
city.
       "Kojirō's living with Iwama Kakubei," she was told.
       "Kakubei's a vassal of the Hosokawas, but his own house is on the
Takanawa highroad."
       "It's about halfway up Isarago Hill. Anybody can tell you where that is."
"If you have any difficulty, ask for Tsukinomisaki. That's another name for
Isarago Hill."
       "The house is easy to recognize, because the gate is painted bright red. It's
the only place around there with a red gate."
       "All right, I understand," said Osugi impatiently, resenting the implication
that she was senile, or stupid. "It doesn't sound difficult, so I'll just be on my
way. Take care of things while I'm out. Be careful about fire. We don't want the
place to burn down while Yajibei's away." Having put on her zōri, she checked to
make sure her short sword was at her side, took a firm grip on her staff and
marched off.
       A few minutes later, Jūrō reappeared and asked where she was.
       "She asked us how to get to Kakubei's house and went out by herself."
"Oh, well, what can you do with a pigheaded old woman?" Then he shouted in
the direction of the men's quarters, "Koroku!"
       The Acolyte abandoned his gambling and answered the summons

posthaste. "You were going to see Kojirō last night, then you put it off. Now look
what's happened. The old woman's gone by herself."
      "So?"
      "When the boss gets back, she'll blab to him."
      "You're right. And with that tongue of hers, she'll make us look real bad."
       "Yeah. If she could only walk as well as she talks, but she's thin as a
grasshopper. If she gets run into by a horse, that'll be the end of her. I hate to ask
you, but you better go after her and see she gets there in one piece."
       Koroku ran off, and Jūrō, ruminating on the absurdity of it all,
appropriated a corner of the young men's room. It was a big room, perhaps thirty
by forty feet. The floor was covered with thin, finely woven matting, and a wide
variety of swords and other weapons were lying about. Hanging from nails were
hand towels, kimono, underwear, fire hats and other items of the sort a band of
ne'er-do-wells might require. There were two incongruous articles. One was a
woman's kimono, in bright colors with a red silk lining; the other was the gold-
lacquered mirror stand over which it was suspended. They had been placed there
on the instructions of Kojirō, who explained to Yajibei, somewhat mysteriously,
that if a group of men lived together in one room with no feminine touch, they
were apt to get out of hand and fight each other, rather than save their energies
for meaningful battles.
       "You're cheating, you son of a bitch!"
       "Who's cheating? You're nuts."
       Jūrō cast a disdainful look at the gamblers and lay down with his legs
crossed comfortably. With all the rumpus going on, sleep was out of the
question, but he wasn't going to demean himself by joining one of the card or
dice games. No competition, as he saw it.
       As he closed his eyes, he heard a dejected voice say, "It's no good today—
no luck at all." The loser, with the sad eyes of the utterly defeated, dropped a
pillow on the floor and stretched out beside Jūrō. They were joined by another,
then another and another.
       "What's this?" asked one of them, reaching out for the sheet of paper that
had fallen from Jūrō's kimono. "Well, I'll be—it's a sutra. Now, what would a
mean cuss like you be carrying a sutra for? "
       Jūrō opened one sleepy eye and said lazily, "Oh, that? It's something the
old woman copied. She said she'd sworn to make a thousand of them."
       "Let me see it," said another man, making a grab for it. "What do you
know? It's written out nice and clear. Why, anybody could read it."

      "Does that mean you think you can read it?"
     "Of course. It's child's play."
     "All right then, let's hear some of it. Put a nice tune to it. Chant it like a
     priest."
     "Are you joking? It's not a popular song."
      "What difference does that make? A long time ago they used to sing sutras.
That's how Buddhist hymns got started. You know a hymn when you hear one,
don't you?"
     "You can't chant these words to the tune of a hymn."
     "Well, use any tune you like."
     "You sing, Jūrō."
     Encouraged by the enthusiasm of the others, Jūrō, still lying on his back,
     opened the sutra above his face and began:


      "The Sutra on the Great Love of Parents.


     Thus have I heard.
     Once when the Buddha was on the Sacred Vulture Peak
     In the City of Royal Palaces,
     Preaching to bodhisattvas and disciples,
     There gathered a multitude of monks and nuns and lay believers, both
male and female,
     All the people of all the heavens, dragon gods and demons,
     To hear the Sacred Law.
     Around the jeweled throne they gathered
     And gazed, with unwavering eyes,
     At the holy face—"


      "What's all that mean?"
      "When it says 'nuns,' does it mean the girls we call nuns? You know, I
heard some of the nuns from Yoshiwara have started powdering their faces gray
and will give it to you for less than in the whorehouses—"
      "Quiet!"

"At this time the Buddha
Preached the Law as follows:
'All ye good men and good women,
Acknowledge your debt for your father's compassion,
Acknowledge your debt for your mother's mercy.
For the life of a human being in this world
Has karma as its basic cause,
But parents as its immediate means of origin."'


"It's just talking about being good to your mama and daddy. You've already
heard it a million times."
"Shh!"
"Sing some more. We'll be quiet."


"'Without a father, the child is not born.
Without a mother, the child is not nourished.
The spirit comes from the father's seed;
The body grows within the mother's womb."'


Jūrō paused to rearrange himself and pick his nose, then resumed.


"'Because of these relationships,
The concern of a mother for her child
Is without comparison in this world...."'


Noticing how silent the others were, Jūrō asked, "Are you listening?"
"Yes. Go on."


"'From the time when she receives the child in her womb,
During the passage of nine months,

      Going, coming, sitting, sleeping,
      She is visited by suffering.
      She ceases to have her customary love for food or drink or clothing
      And worries solely about a safe delivery."'


      "I'm tired," complained Jūrō. "That's enough, isn't it?"
      "No. Keep singing. We're listening."


      "'The months are full, and the days sufficient.
      At the time of birth, the winds of karma hasten it on,
      Her bones are racked with pain.
      The father, too, trembles and is afraid.
      Relatives and servants worry and are distressed.
      When the child is born and dropped upon the grass,
      The boundless joy of the father and mother
      Match that of a penurious woman
      Who has found the omnipotent magic jewel.
      When the child utters its first sounds,
      The mother feels that she herself is born anew.
      Her chest becomes the child's place of rest;
      Her knees, its playground,
      Her breasts, its source of food.
      Her love, its very life.
      Without its mother, the child cannot dress or undress.
      Though the mother hungers,
      She takes the food from her own mouth and gives it to her child.
      Without the mother, the child cannot be nourished....'"


    "What's the matter? Why'd you stop?"
    "Wait a minute, will you?"
    "Will you look at that? He's crying like a baby."
    "Aw, shut up!"
     It had all begun as an idle way to pass the time, almost a joke, but the
meaning of the words of the sutra was sinking in. Three or four others besides

the reader had unsmiling faces, their eyes a faraway look.


      "'The mother goes to the neighboring village to work.
      She draws water, builds the fire,
      Pounds the grain, makes the flour.
      At night when she returns,
      Before she reaches the house,
      She hears the baby's crying
      And is filled with love.
      Her chest heaves, her heart cries out,
      The milk flows forth, she cannot bear it.
      She runs to the house.
      The baby, seeing its mother approach from afar,
      Works its brain, shakes its head,
      And wails for her.
      She bends her body,
      Takes the child's two hands,
      Places her lips upon its lips.
      There is no greater love than this.
      When the child is two,
      He leaves the mother's breast.
      But without his father, he would not know that fire can burn.
      Without his mother, he would not know that a knife can cut off fingers.
      When he is three, he is weaned and learns to eat.
      Without his father, he would not know that poison can kill.
      Without his mother, he would not know that medicine cures.
      When the parents go to other houses
      And are presented with marvelous delicacies,
      They do not eat but put the food in their pockets
      And take it home for the child, to make him rejoice...."'


     "You blubbering again?"
     "I can't help it. I just remembered something."
     "Cut it out. You'll have me doing it too."
      Sentimentality with regard to parents was strictly taboo among these

denizens of society's outer edge, for to express filial affection was to invite
charges of weakness, effeminacy or worse. But it would have done Osugi's aging
heart good to see them now. The sutra reading, possibly because of the simplicity
of the language, had reached the core of their being.
     "Is that all? Isn't there any more?"
     "There's lots more."
     "Well?"
     "Wait a minute, will you?" Jūrō stood up, blew his nose loudly and sat
     down to intone the rest.


     "'The child grows.
     The father brings cloth to clothe him.
     The mother combs his locks.
     The parents give every beautiful thing they possess to him,
     Keeping for themselves only that which is old and worn.
     The child takes a bride
     And brings this stranger into the house.
     The parents become more distant.
     The new husband and wife are intimate with each other.
     They stay in their own room, talking happily with each other."'


     "That's the way it works, all right," broke in a voice.


     "'The parents grow old.
     Their spirits weaken, their strength diminishes.
     They have only the child to depend on,
     Only his wife to do things for them.
     But the child no longer comes to them,
     Neither at night nor in the daytime.
     Their room is cold.
     There is no more pleasant talk.
     They are like lonely guests at an inn.
     A crisis arises, and they call their child.
     Nine times in ten, he comes not,

      Nor does he serve them.
      He grows angry and reviles them,
      Saying it would be better to die
      Than to linger on unwanted in this world.
      The parents listen, and their hearts are filled with rage.
      Weeping, they say, "When you were young,
      Without us, you would not have been born,
      Without us, you could not have grown.
      Ah! How we—""'


       Jūrō broke off abruptly and threw the text aside. "I ... I can't. Somebody
else read it."
       But there was no one to take his place. Lying on their backs, sprawled out
on their bellies, sitting with their legs crossed and their heads drooping between
their knees, they were as tearful as lost children.
       Into the middle of this unlikely scene walked Sasaki Kojirō.
