The Talk of the Town


      Kōsuke's wife was in the kitchen making gruel for Shinzō when Iori came
      in. "The plums are turning yellow," he said.
      "If they're almost ripe, that means the cicadas will be singing soon," she
      answered absently.
      "Don't you pickle the plums?"
      "No. There aren't many of us here, and pickling all those plums would take
      several pounds of salt."
       "The salt wouldn't go to waste, but the plums will if you don't pickle them.
And if there was a war or a flood, they'd come in handy, wouldn't they? Since
you're busy taking care of the wounded man, I'll be happy to pickle them for
you."
       "My, what a funny child you are, worrying about floods and such. You
think like an old man."
       Iori was already getting an empty wooden bucket out of the closet. With
this in hand, he sauntered out into the garden and looked up at the plum tree.
Alas, though sufficiently grown up to worry about the future, he was still young
enough to be easily distracted by the sight of a buzzing cicada. Sneaking closer,
he captured it and held it in his cupped hands, making it screech like a terrified
hag.
       Peeking between his thumbs, Iori experienced a strange sensation. Insects
were supposed to be bloodless, he thought, but the cicada felt warm. Perhaps
even cicadas when faced with the peril of death gave off body heat. Suddenly he
was seized by a mixture of fear and pity. Spreading his palms, he tossed the
cicada into the air and watched it fly off toward the street.
       The plum tree, which was quite large, was the home of a sizable
community—fat caterpillars with surprisingly beautiful fur, ladybirds, tiny blue
frogs clinging to the undersides of leaves, small sleeping butterflies, dancing
gadflies. Gazing in fascination at this little corner of the animal kingdom, he
thought it would be inhuman to throw these ladies and gentlemen into
consternation by shaking a branch. Carefully, he reached out, picked a plum and
bit into it. Then he shook the nearest branch gently and was surprised when the
fruit did not fall off. Reaching out, he picked a few plums and dropped them into

the bucket below.
       "Son of a bitch!" shouted Iori, abruptly firing three or four plums into the
narrow lane next to the house. The clothes-drying pole between the house and
the fence fell to the ground with a clatter, and footsteps hastily retreated from the
lane into the street.
       Kōsuke's face appeared at the bamboo grille of his workroom window.
"What was that noise?" he asked, his eyes wide with astonishment.
       Jumping down from the tree, Iori cried, "Another strange man was hiding
in the shadows, squatting right there in the lane. I threw some plums at him, and
he ran away."
     The sword polisher came outside, wiping his hands on a towel. "What sort
     of man?"
     "A thug."
     "One of Hangawara's men?"
       "I don't know. Why do those men come snooping around here?" "They're
looking for a chance to get back at Shinzō."
       Iori looked toward the back room, where the injured man was just
finishing his gruel. His wound had healed to the extent that the bandage was no
longer necessary.
     "Kōsuke," called Shinzō.
     The craftsman walked to the edge of the veranda and asked, "How are you
     feeling?"
     Pushing his tray aside, Shinzō reseated himself more formally. "I want to
     apologize for causing you so much trouble."
     "Don't mention it. I'm sorry I've been too busy to do more for you."
     "I notice that besides worrying about me, you're being annoyed by those
     Hangawara hoodlums. The longer I stay, the more danger there is that
     they'll
     come to regard you as an enemy too. I think I should be leaving." "Don't
     give it a thought."
     "I'm much better now, as you can see. I'm ready to go home."
     "Today?"
     "Yes."
     "Don't be in such a hurry. At least wait until Musashi comes back."
     "I'd rather not, but please thank him for me. He's been very kind to me too. I
     can walk all right now."
       "You don't seem to understand. Hangawara's men are watching this house

day and night. They'll pounce on you the minute you step outside. I can't
possibly let you leave alone."
       "I had a good reason for killing Jūrō and Koroku. Kojirō started all this,
not me. But if they want to attack me, let them attack."
       Shinzō was on his feet and ready to go. Sensing there was no way of
holding him back, Kōsuke and his wife went to the front of the shop to see him
off.
       Musashi appeared at the door just then, his sunburned forehead moist with
sweat. "Going out?" he asked. "Going home? ... Well, I'm glad to see you feel
well enough, but it'd be dangerous to go alone. I'll go with you."
      Shinzō tried to refuse, but Musashi insisted. Minutes later, they set off
      together.
      "It must be difficult to walk after being in bed so long."
      "Somehow the ground seems higher than it really is."
      "It's a long way to Hirakawa Tenjin. Why don't we hire a palanquin for
      you?"
      "I suppose I ought to have mentioned it before. I'm not going back to the
      school."
      "Oh? Where then?"
       Casting his eyes downward, Shinzō answered, "It's rather humiliating, but
I think I'll go to my father's house for a while. It's in Ushigome."
       Musashi stopped a palanquin and virtually forced Shinzō into it. Despite
the insistence of the bearers, Musashi refused one for himself—to the
disappointment of the Hangawara men watching from around the next corner.
      "Look, he put Shinzō into a palanquin."
      "I saw him glance this way."
      "It's too early to do anything yet."
       After the palanquin turned right by the outer moat, they hitched up their
skirts, pulled back their sleeves, and followed along behind, their glittering eyes
seemingly ready to pop out and shoot toward Musashi's back.
       Musashi and Shinzō had reached the neighborhood of Ushigafuchi when a
small rock glanced off the palanquin pole. At the same time, the gang started
shouting and moved in to surround its prey.
       "Wait!" called one of them.
       "Just stay where you are, you bastard!"
       The bearers, terrified, dropped the palanquin and fled. Shinzō crawled out
of the palanquin, hand on sword. Pulling himself to his feet, he assumed a stance

and cried, "Is it me you're telling to wait?"
       Musashi jumped in front of him and shouted, "State your business!"
       The hoodlums inched closer, cautiously, as though feeling their way
through shallow water.
       "You know what we want!" spat one of them. "Turn over that yellowbelly
you're protecting. And don't try anything funny, or you'll be dead too."
       Encouraged by this bravado, they seethed with bloodthirsty fury, but none
advanced to strike with his sword. The fire in Musashi's eyes was sufficient to
hold them at bay. They howled and cursed, from a safe distance.
       Musashi and Shinzō glared at them in silence. Moments passed before
Musashi took them unawares by shouting, "If Hangawara Yajibei is among you,
let him come forward."
       "The boss isn't here. But if you have anything to say, speak to me,
Nembutsu Tazaemon, and I'll do you the favor of listening." The elderly man
who stepped forward wore a white hemp kimono and had Buddhist prayer beads
hung around his neck.
      "What do you have against Hōjō Shinzō?"
      Squaring his shoulders, Tazaemon replied, "He slaughtered two of our
      men."
      "According to Shinzō, your two louts helped Kojirō kill a number of
      Obata's students."
      "That was one thing. This is another. If we don't settle our score with
      Shinzō, we'll be laughed off the streets."
       "That may be the way things are done in the world you live in," Musashi
said in a conciliatory tone. "But it's different in the world of the samurai. Among
warriors, you can't fault a man for seeking and taking his proper revenge. A
samurai may take revenge for the sake of justice or to defend his honor, but not
to satisfy a personal grudge. It's not manly. And what you're trying to do right
now isn't manly."
       "Not manly? You're accusing us of being unmanly?"
       "If Kojirō came forward and challenged us in his own name, that'd be all
right. But we can't get involved in a squabble raised by Kojirō's minions."
       "There you go, preaching self-righteously, just like any other samurai. Say
what you please. We still have to protect our name."
       "If samurai and outlaws fight over whose rules are to prevail, the streets
will be filled with blood. The only place to settle this is at the magistrate's office.
How about it, Nembutsu?"

      "Horse manure. If it was something the magistrate could settle, we wouldn't
      be here to begin with."
      "Listen, how old are you?"
      "What business is it of yours?"
      "I'd say you look old enough to know you shouldn't be leading a group of
      young men to a meaningless death."
       "Ah, keep your smart talk to yourself. I'm not too old for a fight!"
Tazaemon drew his sword, and the hoodlums moved forward, jostling and
shouting.
       Musashi dodged Tazaemon's thrust and grabbed him by the back of his
gray head. Covering the ten paces or so to the moat in great strides, he
summarily dumped him over the edge. Then, as the mob closed in, he dashed
back, picked Shinzō up by the waist and made off with him.
       He ran across a field, toward the middle reaches of a hill. Below them a
stream flowed into the moat and a bluish marsh was visible at the bottom of the
slope. Halfway up, Musashi stopped and stood Shinzō on his feet. "Now," he
said, "let's run." Shinzō hesitated, but Musashi prodded him into motion.
      The hoodlums, having recovered from their shock, were giving chase.
      "Catch him!"
      "No pride!"
       "That's a samurai?"
       "He can't throw Tazaemon in the moat and get away with it!"
       Ignoring the taunts and slurs, Musashi said to Shinzō, "Don't even consider
getting involved with them. Run! It's the only thing to do in a case like this."
With a grin, he added, "It's not so easy to make good time on this terrain, is it?"
They were passing through what would someday be known as Ushigafuchi and
Kudan Hill, but now the area was heavily wooded.
      By the time they lost their pursuers, Shinzō's face was deathly pale. "Worn
      out?" Musashi asked solicitously.
      "It's ... it's not so bad."
      "I suppose you don't like the idea of letting them insult us like that without
      fighting back."
      "Well..."
       "Ha, ha! Think about it quietly and calmly, and you'll see why. There're
times when it makes you feel better to run away. There's a stream over there.
Rinse your mouth out, and then I'll take you to your father's house."
      In a few minutes, the forest around the Akagi Myōjin Shrine came into

    view. Lord Hōjō's house was just below.
    "I hope you'll come in and meet my father," Shinzō said when they came to
    the earthen wall surrounding the house.
    "Some other time. Get plenty of rest and take care of yourself." With that,
    he was off.


       After this incident, Musashi's name was heard quite frequently in the
streets of Edo, far more frequently than he would have wished. People were
calling him "a fake," "the coward to end all cowards," and saying, "shameless ...
a disgrace to the samurai class. If a fraud like that defeated the Yoshiokas in
Kyoto, they must have been hopelessly weak. He must have challenged them
knowing they couldn't protect themselves. And then he probably ran away before
he was in any real danger. All that phony wants to do is sell his name to people
who don't know swordsmanship." Before long, it was impossible to find anyone
who would put in a good word for him.
       The crowning insult was signs posted all over Edo: "Here's a word to
Miyamoto Musashi, who turned tail and ran. The Hon'iden dowager is eager for
revenge. We, too, would like to see your face instead of your back for a change.
If you are a samurai, come out and fight. The Hangawara Association."
