The Demon’s Attendant


       The dogs of Mitsumine were a feral breed, said to result from the crossing
of dogs brought by immigrants from Korea more than a thousand years earlier
with the wild dogs of the Chichibu Mountains. Only a step removed from the
wild stage, they roamed the mountainside and fed like wolves on the other
wildlife in the region. But since they were regarded as messengers of the deity
and were spoken of as his "attendants," worshipers often took home printed or
sculptured images of them as good-luck charms.
      The black dog with the man following Musashi was the size of a calf.
      As Musashi entered the Kannon'in, the man turned, said, "This way," and
      beckoned with his free hand.
      The dog growled, tugged at his leash—a piece of thick rope—and began
      sniffing.
      Flicking the leash across the dog's back, the man said, "Shh, Kuro, be
      quiet."
       The man was about fifty, solidly but supplely built, and like his dog, he
seemed not quite tame. But he was well dressed. With his kimono, which looked
like a priest's robe or a samurai's formal wear, he wore a narrow, flat obi and a
hemp hakama. His straw sandals, of the sort men wore at festivals, were fitted
with new thongs.
      "Baiken?" The woman held back, to keep away from the dog.
      "Down," commanded Baiken, rapping the animal sharply on the head. "I'm
      glad you spotted him, Okō."
      "Then it was him?"
      "No doubt about it."
       For a moment, they stood silently looking through a break in the clouds at
the stars, hearing but not really listening to the sacred dance music.
      "What'll we do?" she asked.
      "I'll think of something."
      "We can't let this chance go to waste."
      Okō stared expectantly at Baiken.
      "Is Tōji at home?" he asked.
      "Yes; he got drunk on the festival sake and fell asleep."

      "Get him up."
      "What about you?"
      "I've got work to do. After I make my rounds, I'll come to your place."
       Outside the main shrine gate, Okō broke into a trot. Most of the twenty or
thirty houses were souvenir shops or teahouses. There were also a few small
eating establishments, from which emanated the cheerful voices of revelers.
From the eaves of the shack Okō entered hung a sign saying "Rest House." On
one of the stools in the dirt-floored front room sat a young servant enjoying a
catnap.
      "Still sleeping?" asked Okō.
      The girl, expecting a scolding, shook her head vigorously.
      "I don't mean you—my husband."
      "Oh, yes, he's still asleep."
       With a disapproving click of her tongue, Okō grumbled, "A festival's going
on, and he's sleeping. This is the only shop that isn't full of customers."
       Near the door, a man and an old woman were steaming rice and beans in
an earthen oven. The flames struck the only cheerful note in the otherwise
gloomy interior.
       Okō walked over to where a man was sleeping on a bench by the wall,
tapped him on the shoulder and said, "Get up, you! Open your eyes for a
change."
       "Huh?" he mumbled, raising himself slightly.
       "Oh, my," she exclaimed, as she backed away. Then she laughed and said,
"I'm sorry. I thought you were my husband."
       A piece of matting had slipped to the ground. The man, a round-faced
youth with large, questioning eyes, picked it up, pulled it over his face and
stretched out again. His head rested on a wooden pillow and his sandals were
spattered with mud. On the table next to him were a tray and an empty rice bowl;
by the wall, a travel pack, a basket hat and a staff.
       Turning back to the girl, Okō said, "I suppose he's a customer?"
       "Yes. He said he's planning to go up to the inner shrine early in the
morning and asked if it was all right to take a nap here."
       "Where's Tōji?"
       "I'm over here, stupid." His voice came from behind a torn shoji. Reclining
in the next room, with one foot hanging out into the shop, he said sullenly, "And
why carry on about me taking a little snooze? Where've you been all this time,
when you should have been tending to business?"

       In many ways, the years had been even less kind to Okō than they had to
Tōji. Not only was the charm of her earlier years no longer evident, but running
the Oinu Teahouse required her to do a man's work to make up for her shiftless
spouse, since Tōji made a pittance hunting in the winter but did little else. After
Musashi burned down their hideout with its trick room at Wada Pass, their
henchmen had all deserted them.
       Tōji's bleary red eyes gradually focused on a barrel of water. Pulling
himself to his feet, he went over to it and gulped down a dipperful.
       Okō leaned on a bench and looked over her shoulder at him. "I don't care if
there is a festival going on. It's about time you learned when to stop. You're
lucky you didn't get run through by a sword while you were out."
      "Huh?"
      "I'm telling you you'd better be more careful."
      "I don't know what you're talking about."
      "Did you know Musashi's here at the festival?"
       "Musashi? Miyamoto ... Musashi?" Jolted into wakefulness, he said, "Are
you serious? Look, you'd better go hide in the back."
       "Is that all you can think of—hiding?"
       "I don't want what happened at Wada Pass to happen again."
       "Coward. Aren't you eager to get even with him, not only for that but for
what he did to the Yoshioka School? I am, and I'm only a woman."
       "Yeah, but don't forget, we had lots of men to help us then: Now there's
just the two of us." Tōji hadn't been at Ichijōji, but he had heard how Musashi
had fought and had no illusions about who would end up dead if the two of them
ran into each other again.
       Sidling up to her husband, Okō said, "That's where you're wrong. There's
another man here, isn't there? A man who hates Musashi as much as you do."
       Tōji knew she was referring to Baiken, whom they had become acquainted
with when their wanderings brought them to Mitsumine.
       Since there were no more battles, being a freebooter was no longer
profitable, so Baiken had opened a smithy in Iga, only to be driven out when
Lord Tōdō tightened his rule over the province. Intending to seek his fortune in
Edo, he had disbanded his gang, but then, through the introduction of a friend,
had become the watchman at the temple's treasure house.
       Even now, the mountains between the provinces of Musashi and Kai were
infested with bandits. In hiring Baiken to guard the treasure house, with its
religious treasures and donated cash, the temple elders were fighting fire with

fire. He had the advantage of being intimately familiar with the ways of bandits,
and he was also an acknowledged expert with the chain-ball-sickle. As the
originator of the Yaegaki Style, he might possibly have attracted the attention of
a daimyō, had it not been for the fact that his brother was Tsujikaze Temma. In
years long past, the two of them had terrorized the region between Mount Ibuki
and the Yasugawa district. Changing times meant nothing to Baiken. To his way
of thinking, Temma's death at the hands of Takezō had been the ultimate cause of
all his subsequent difficulties.
       Okō had long since told Baiken about their grievance against Musashi,
exaggerating her rancor in order to cement her friendship with him. He had
responded by scowling and saying, "One of these days ..."
       Okō had just finished telling Tōji how she had caught sight of Musashi
from the teahouse, then lost him in the crowd. Later, on a hunch, she had gone to
the Kannon'in, arriving just as Musashi and Iori were leaving for the outer
shrine. This information she had promptly imparted to Baiken.
       "So that's the way it is," said Tōji, taking courage from the knowledge that
a dependable ally had already been lined up. He knew Baiken, using his favorite
weapon, had beaten every swordsman at the recent shrine tournament. If he
attacked Musashi, there was a good chance of winning. "What did he say when
you told him?"
       "He'll come as soon as he finishes his rounds."
       "Musashi's no fool. If we're not careful—" Tōji shuddered and uttered a
gruff, unintelligible sound. Okō followed his eyes to the man sleeping on the
bench.
      "Who's that?" asked Tōji.
      "Just a customer," answered Okō.
      "Wake him up and get him out of here."
      Okō delegated this task to the girl servant, who went to the far corner and
      shook the man until he sat up.
      "Get out," she said bluntly. "We're closing up now."
       He stood up, stretched and said, "That was a nice nap." Smiling to himself
and blinking his large eyes, he moved quickly but smoothly, wrapping the
matting around his shoulders, donning his basket hat and adjusting his pack. He
placed his staff under his arm, said, "Thanks a lot," with a bow and walked
quickly out the door.
       Okō judged from his clothing and accent that he was not one of the local
farmers, but he seemed harmless enough. "Funny-looking man," she said. "I

wonder if he paid his bill."
      Okō and Tōji were still rolling up blinds and straightening up the shop
when Baiken came in with Kuro.
      "Good to see you," said Tōji. "Let's go to the back room."
      Baiken silently removed his sandals and followed them, while the dog
nosed around for scraps of food. The back room was only a broken-down lean-to
with a first coat of rough plaster on the walls. It was out of earshot of anyone in
the shop.
      When a lamp had been lit, Baiken said, "This evening in front of the dance
stage, I overheard Musashi tell the boy they'd go up to the inner shrine tomorrow
morning. Later I went to the Kannon'in and checked it out."
      Both Okō and Tōji swallowed and looked out the window; the peak on
which the inner shrine stood was dimly outlined against the starry sky.
      Knowing whom he was up against, Baiken had made a plan of attack and
mobilized reinforcements. Two priests, guards at the treasure house, had already
agreed to help and had gone on ahead with their lances. There was also a man
from the Yoshioka School, who ran a small dōjō at the shrine. Baiken calculated
he could mobilize perhaps ten freebooters, men he'd known in Iga who were now
working in the vicinity. Tōji would carry a musket, while Baiken would have his
chain-ball-sickle.
      "You've done all this already?" asked Tōji in disbelief.
      Baiken grinned but said nothing more.


      A diminutive sliver of moon hung high above the valley, hidden from view
by a thick fog. The great peak was still sleeping, with only the gurgling and
roaring of the river to accentuate the silence. A group of dark figures huddled on
the bridge at Kosaruzawa.
     "Tōji?" Baiken whispered hoarsely.
     "Here."
     "Be sure to keep your fuse dry."
      Conspicuous among the motley crew were the two lancer priests, who had
the skirts of their robes tucked up ready for action. The others were dressed in a
variety of outfits, but all were shod so as to be able to move nimbly.
     "Is this everybody?"
     "Yes."
     "How many altogether?"

      They counted heads: thirteen.
       "Good," said Baiken. He went over their instructions again. They listened
in silence, nodding occasionally. Then, at a signal, they scurried into the fog to
take up positions along the road. At the end of the bridge, they passed a
milestone saying: "Six Thousand Yards to the Inner Shrine."
       When the bridge was empty again, a great company of monkeys emerged
from hiding, jumping from limbs, climbing vines, converging on the road. They
ran out onto the bridge, crawled under it, threw stones into the ravine. The fog
toyed with them, as if encouraging their frolic. Had a Taoist Immortal appeared
and beckoned, perhaps they would have been transformed into clouds and flown
off with him to heaven.
       The barking of a dog echoed through the mountains. The monkeys
vanished, like sumac leaves before an autumn wind.
       Kuro came up the road, dragging Okō along with him. He'd somehow
broken loose, and though Okō had eventually got hold of the leash, she hadn't
been able to make him go back. She knew Tōji didn't want the dog around to
make noise, so she thought maybe she could get him out of the way by letting
him go up to the inner shrine.


      As the restlessly shifting fog began to settle in the valleys like snow, the
three peaks of Mitsumine and the lesser mountains between Musashino and Kai
rose against the sky in all their grandeur. The winding road stood out white, and
birds began to ruffle their feathers and chirp a greeting to the dawn.
     Iori said, half to himself, "Why is that, I wonder?"
     "Why is what?" asked Musashi.
     "It's getting light, but I can't see the sun."
     "For one thing, you're looking toward the west."
     "Oh." Iori gave the moon, sinking behind the distant peaks, a cursory
     glance.
     "Iori, a lot of your friends seem to live here in the mountains."
     "Where?"
     "Over there." Musashi laughed and pointed to some monkeys clustered
     around their mother.
     "I wish I was one of them."
     "Why?"
     Y•

      "At least they have a mother."
       They climbed a steep part of the road in silence and came to a relatively
flat stretch. Musashi noticed the grass had been trampled by a large number of
feet.
      After winding around the mountain for a while more, they reached a level
      area where they were facing east.
      "Look," cried Iori, looking over his shoulder at Musashi. "The sun's coming
      up.
      "So it is."
       From the sea of clouds beneath them, the mountains of Kai and Kōzuke
jutted up like islands. Iori stopped and stood stock still, feet together, arms at his
sides, lips tightly set. He stared in rapt fascination at the great golden sphere,
imagining himself to be a child of the sun. All at once he exclaimed in a very
loud voice, "It's Amaterasu Omikami! Isn't it?" He looked to Musashi for
confirmation.
       "That's right."
       Raising his arms high above his head, the boy filtered the brilliant light
through his fingers. "My blood!" he cried. "It's the same color as the sun's
blood." Clapping his hands, as he would at a shrine to summon the deity, he
bowed his head in silent obeisance, thinking: "The monkeys have a mother. I
have none. But I have this goddess. They have none."
       The revelation filled him with joy, and as he burst into tears, he seemed to
hear from beyond the clouds the music of the shrine dances. The drums boomed
in his ears, while the counterpoint of the flutes hovered around the melody of the
Dance of Iwato. His feet caught the rhythm; his arms swayed gracefully. From
his lips came the words he had memorized only the night before:


           "The catalpa bow—
           With each coming of spring,
           I hope to see the dancing
           Of the myriad of gods,
           Oh, how I hope to see their dancing—"


      Suddenly realizing Musashi had gone on ahead, he abandoned his dance
and ran to catch up.

        The morning light barely penetrated the forest they now entered. Here, in
the approach to the inner shrine, the cryptomerias were of enormous
circumference and all about the same height. Tiny white flowers grew in the
thick patches of moss clinging to the trees. Suspecting the trees were ancient—
five hundred years old, perhaps even a thousand—Iori had an urge to bow to
them. Here and there, bright red vine maple caught his eye. Low striped bamboo
encroaching on the road narrowed it to a path.
        Without warning, the earth seemed to tremble under their feet. Close upon
the thunderous report came an unnerving scream and a cascade of sharp echoes.
Iori covered his ears with his hands and dived into the bamboo.
        "Iori! Stay down!" Musashi commanded from the shadow of a large tree.
"Don't move even if they trample on you!"
        The gloomy half light seemed infested with lances and swords. Because of
the scream, the attackers thought at first the bullet had found its mark, but there
was no body in sight. Uncertain as to what had happened, they froze.
        Iori was at the center of a circle of eyes and unsheathed blades. In the
deathly silence that followed, curiosity got the better of him. He slowly raised
his head above the bamboo. Only a few feet away, a sword blade, extending
from behind a tree, caught a flash of sunlight.
        Losing all control, Iori screamed at the top of his lungs, "Sensei!
Somebody's hiding there!" As he shouted, he jumped to his feet and made a dash
for safety.
        The sword leapt from the shadows and hung like a demon above his head.
But only for an instant. Musashi's dagger flew straight to the swordsman's head
and lodged in the temple.
        "Ya-a-h!"
        One of the priests charged at Musashi with his lance. Musashi caught the
lance and held it tightly with one hand.
        Another death cry sounded, as if the man's mouth were full of rocks.
Wondering if his attackers could be fighting among themselves, Musashi
strained his eyes to see. The other priest took careful aim with his lance and
hurtled toward him. Musashi caught this lance too and held it securely under his
right arm.
        "Jump him now!" screamed one of the priests, realizing that Musashi had
his hands full.
        His voice stentorian, Musashi shouted, "Who are you? Identify yourselves,
or I'll assume you're all enemies. It's a shame to spill blood on this holy ground,

but I may have no choice."
       Whirling the lances around and sending the two priests off on different
tangents, Musashi whipped out his sword and finished off one of them before he
had stopped tumbling. Spinning around, he found himself confronting three
more blades, lined up across the narrow path. Without pausing, he moved toward
them threateningly, one step at a time. Two more men came out and took their
places shoulder to shoulder beside the first three.
       As Musashi advanced and his opponents retreated, he caught a glimpse of
the other lancer priest, who had recovered his weapon and was chasing Iori.
"Stop, you cutthroat!" But the moment Musashi turned to go to Iori's rescue, the
five men let out a howl and charged. Musashi rushed head on to meet them. It
was like the collision of two raging waves, but the spray was blood, not brine.
Musashi kept whirling from opponent to opponent with the speed of a typhoon.
Two bloodcurdling cries, then a third. They fell like dead trees, each sliced
through the middle of the torso. In Musashi's right hand was his long sword, in
his left the short one.
       With cries of terror, the last two turned and ran, Musashi close behind
them.
       "Where do you think you're going?" he shouted, splitting one man's head
open with the short sword. The black spurt of blood caught Musashi in the eye.
Reflexively, he raised his left hand to his face and, in that instant, heard a strange
metallic sound behind him.
       He swung his long sword to deflect the object, but the effect of the action
was very different from the intention. Seeing the ball and chain wrapped around
the blade near the sword guard, he was seized with alarm. Musashi had been
taken off guard.
      "Musashi!" shouted Baiken. He pulled the chain taut. "Have you forgotten
      me?"
      Musashi stared for a moment before exclaiming, "Shishido Baiken, from
      Mount Suzuka!"
      "That's right. My brother Temma's calling you from the valley of hell. I'll
      see that you get there quick!"
       Musashi could not free his sword. By slow degrees, Baiken was taking in
the chain and moving closer, to make use of the razor-sharp sickle. As Musashi
looked for an opening for his short sword, he realized with a start that if he had
been fighting with only his long sword, he would be utterly defenseless now.
       Baiken's neck was so swollen it was nearly as thick as his head. With a

strained cry, he jerked powerfully on the chain.
       Musashi had blundered; he knew that. The ball-chain-sickle was an
unusual weapon, but not unfamiliar to him. Years earlier, he had been struck by
admiration when he had first seen the hellish device in the hands of Baiken's
wife. But it was one thing to have seen it, something else to know how to
counter it.
       Baiken gloated, a broad, evil grin spreading over his face. Musashi knew
there was only one course open to him: he had to let go of his long sword. He
looked for the right moment.
       With a ferocious howl, Baiken leapt and swept the sickle toward Musashi's
head, missing by only a hair's breadth. Musashi released the sword with a loud
grunt. No sooner had the sickle been withdrawn than the ball came whirring
through the air. Then the sickle, the ball, the sickle . . .
       Dodging the sickle put Musashi right in the path of the ball. Unable to get
close enough to strike, he wondered frantically how long he could keep it up. "Is
this it?" he asked. The question was conscious, but as the tension increased, his
body became difficult to control and his responses purely physiological. Not
only his muscles but his very skin was struggling instinctively; concentration
became so intense the flow of oily sweat stopped. Every hair on his body stood
on end.
       It was too late to get behind a tree. If he made a dash for it now, he'd
probably run into another foe.
       He heard a clear, plaintive cry, and thought: "Uh-oh. Iori?" He wanted to
look but in his heart gave the boy up for lost.
       "Die! You son of a bitch!" The cry came from behind Musashi, then:
"Musashi, why're you taking so much time? I'm taking care of the vermin behind
you."
       Musashi didn't recognize the voice but decided he could focus his attention
on Baiken alone.
       To Baiken, the most important factor was his distance from his opponent;
his effectiveness depended on manipulating the length of the chain. If Musashi
could move a foot beyond the reach of the chain or approach a foot nearer,
Baiken would be in trouble. He had to make sure that Musashi did neither.
       Musashi marveled at the man's secret technique, and as he marveled, it
suddenly struck him that here was the principle of the two swords. The chain
was a single length, the ball functioned as the right sword, the sickle as the left.
       "Of course!" he cried triumphantly. "That's it—that's the Yaegaki Style."

Now confident of victory, he leapt back, putting five feet between the two of
them. He transferred his sword to his right hand and hurled it straight as an
arrow.
       Baiken twisted his body, and the sword glanced off, burying itself in the
root of a nearby tree. But as he twisted, the chain wrapped itself around his torso.
Before he could even cry out, Musashi slammed his full weight into him. Baiken
got his hand as far as the hilt of his sword, but Musashi broke his hold with a
sharp chop to the wrist. In a continuation of the same motion, he drew the
weapon and split Baiken open, like lightning splitting a tree. As he pulled the
blade down, he twisted ever so slightly.
       "What a pity," thought Musashi. As the story was later told, he even
uttered a sigh of compassion as the originator of the Yaegaki Style breathed his
last.
       "The karatake slice," exclaimed an admiring voice. "Straight down the
trunk. No different from splitting bamboo. It's the first time I've ever seen it."
       Musashi turned and said, "Why, if it isn't ... Gonnosuke from Kiso. What
are you doing here?"
       "It's been a long time, hasn't it? The god of Mitsumine must have arranged
it, perhaps with the aid of my mother, who taught me so much before she died."
       They fell to chatting, but Musashi suddenly stopped and cried, "Iori!"
"He's all right. I rescued him from that pig of a priest and had him climb a tree."
       Iori, watching them from a high branch, started to speak but instead shaded
his eyes and looked toward a small flat area beyond the edge of the forest. Kuro,
tied to a tree, had caught Okō's kimono sleeve with his teeth. She yanked
desperately at the sleeve. In a trice, it tore off, and she ran away.
       The lone survivor, the other priest, was hobbling along, leaning heavily on
his lance, blood flowing from a head wound. The dog, perhaps crazed by the
smell of blood, started making a terrible racket. The noise echoed and reechoed
for a time, but then the rope gave way, and the dog went after Okō. When he
reached him, the priest lifted his lance and aimed for the dog's head. Wounded in
the neck, the beast ran into the woods.
      "That woman's getting away," cried Iori.
      "Never mind. You can come down now."
      "There's an injured priest over there. Shouldn't you catch him?" "Forget it.
      He doesn't matter anymore."
       "The woman's probably the one from the Oinu Teahouse," said
Gonnosuke. He explained his presence, the heaven-sent coincidence that had

enabled him to come to Musashi's assistance.
       Deeply grateful, Musashi said, "You killed the man who fired the gun?"
       "No." Gonnosuke smiled. "Not me; my staff. I knew ordinarily you could
take care of men like that, but if they were going to use a gun, I decided I'd better
do something. So I came here ahead of them and slipped up behind the man
while it was still dark."
       They checked the corpses. Seven had been killed with the staff, only five
with the sword.
       Musashi said, "I haven't done anything except defend myself, but this area
belongs to the shrine. I feel I should explain things to the government official in
charge. Then he can ask his questions and get the incident cleared up."
       On their way down the mountain, they ran into a contingent of armed
officials at the bridge at Kosaruzawa. Musashi told his story. The captain in
charge listened, seemingly puzzled, but nevertheless ordered Musashi tied up.
       Shocked, Musashi wanted to know why, since he was on his way to report
to them in the first place.
       "Get moving," ordered the captain.
       Angry as Musashi was about being treated as an ordinary criminal, there
was still another surprise coming. There were more officials farther down the
mountain. By the time they arrived in the town, his guard numbered no fewer
than a hundred.
