Four Sages with a Single Light


       "Here we are," Shinzō said as they reached the foot of Akagi Hill.
       From the flute music, which sounded like the accompaniment to a sacred
shrine dance, and the bonfire visible through the woods, Musashi thought a night
festival must be in progress. The trip to Ushigome had taken two hours.
       On one side was the spacious compound of Akagi Shrine; across the
sloping street stood the earthen wall of a large private residence and a gate of
magnificent proportions. When they reached the gate, Musashi dismounted and
handed the reins to Shinzō, thanking him as he did so.
       Shinzō led the horse inside and handed the reins to one of a group of
samurai waiting near the entrance with paper lanterns in their hands. They all
came forward, welcomed him back and led the way through the trees to a
clearing in front of the imposing entrance hall. Inside, servants holding lanterns
were lined up on both sides of the hallway.
       The chief steward greeted them, saying, "Come in. His lordship is
expecting you. I'll show you the way."
       "Thank you," replied Musashi. He followed the steward up a stairway and
into a waiting room.
       The design of the house was unusual; one stairway after another led to a
series of apartments, which gave the impression of being stacked one above
another all the way up Akagi Hill. As he seated himself, Musashi noted that the
room was well up the slope. Beyond a drop at the edge of the garden, he could
just make out the northern part of the castle moat and the woods framing the
escarpment. He found himself thinking that the view from the room in the
daytime must be breathtaking.
       Noiselessly, the door in an arched doorway slid open. A beautiful serving
girl came gracefully in and placed a tray bearing cakes, tea and tobacco in front
of him. Then she slipped out as quietly as she had entered. It seemed as if her
colorful kimono and obi had emerged from and melted into the wall itself. A
faint fragrance lingered after her, and suddenly Musashi was reminded of the
existence of women.
       The master of the house appeared shortly after that, attended by a young
samurai. Dispensing with formalities, he said, "Good of you to come." In good

soldierly fashion, he seated himself cross-legged on a cushion spread by the
attendant and said, "From what I hear, my son is much indebted to you. I hope
you'll pardon my asking you to come here rather than visiting your house to
express my thanks." With his hands resting lightly on the fan in his lap, he
inclined his prominent forehead ever so slightly.
       "I'm honored to be invited to meet you," said Musashi.
       It was not easy to estimate Hōjō Ujikatsu's age. Three front teeth were
missing, but his smooth, shiny skin testified to a determination never to grow
old. The heavy black mustache, streaked with only a few white hairs, had been
allowed to grow out on both sides to conceal any wrinkles resulting from the
lack of teeth. Musashi's first impression was of a man who had many children
and got along well with young people.
       Sensing that his host wouldn't object, Musashi went straight to the point.
"Your son tells me that you have a guest who knows me. Who might that be?"
"Not one but two. You'll see them by and by."
       "Two people?"
       "Yes. They know each other very well, and both are good friends of mine.
I happened to meet them at the castle today. They came back with me, and when
Shinzō came in to greet them, we started chatting about you. One of them said
he hadn't seen you for a long time and would like to. The other, who knows you
only by reputation, expressed the desire to be introduced."
       Smiling broadly, Musashi said, "I think I know. One is Takuan Sōhō, isn't
it?"
       "That's right," exclaimed Lord Ujikatsu, slapping his knee in surprise. "I
haven't seen him since I came east several years ago."
       Before Musashi had time to make a guess at who the other man was, his
lordship said, "Come with me," and went out into the corridor.
       They climbed a short stairway and walked down a long, dark corridor.
Rain shutters were in place on one side. Suddenly Musashi lost sight of Lord
Ujikatsu. He stopped and listened.
       After a few moments, Ujikatsu called, "I'm down here." His voice seemed
to come from a well-lit room that was situated across an open space from the
corridor.
       "I understand," Musashi called back. Instead of heading directly for the
light, he stood where he was. The space outside the corridor was openly inviting,
but something told him danger lurked in that stretch of darkness.
       "What are you waiting for, Musashi? We're over here."

       "Coming," answered Musashi. He was in no position to reply otherwise,
but his sixth sense had warned him to be on the alert. Stealthily, he turned and
walked back about ten paces to a small door, which let out onto the garden.
Slipping on a pair of sandals, he made his way around the garden to the veranda
of Lord Ujikatsu's parlor.
       "Oh, you came that way, did you?" said his lordship, looking around from
the other end of the room. He sounded disappointed.
       "Takuan!" called Musashi as he entered the room, a radiant smile on his
face. The priest, seated in front of the alcove, stood up to greet him. To meet
again—and under the roof of Lord Hōjō Ujikatsu—seemed almost too
fortuitous. Musashi had trouble convincing himself that it was really happening.
       "We'll have to bring each other up to date," said Takuan. "Shall I begin?"
He was clad in the plain robes he always wore. No finery, not so much as prayer
beads. Yet he seemed mellower than before, more soft-spoken. Just as Musashi's
rural upbringing had been leached out of him by strenuous attempts at self-
discipline, Takuan, too, seemed to have had the sharper corners rounded off and
to have become more deeply endowed with the wisdom of Zen. To be sure, he
was no longer a youth. Eleven years older than Musashi, he was now
approaching forty.
       "Let's see. Kyoto, wasn't it? Ah, I remember. It was shortly before I went
back to Tajima. After my mother died, I spent a year in mourning. Then I
traveled for a while, spent some time at the Nansōji in Izumi, then at the
Daitokuji. Later, I saw a good deal of Lord Karasumaru—composed poetry with
him, had tea ceremonies, fended off the cares of this world. Before I knew it, I'd
spent three years in Kyoto. Recently I became friendly with Lord Koide of
Kishiwada Castle and came with him to have a look at Edo."
       "Then you've been here only a short time?"
       "Yes. Although I've met Hidetada twice at the Daitokuji and been
summoned into Ieyasu's presence a number of times, this is my first trip to Edo.
And what about you?"
       "I've been here only since the beginning of this summer."
       "It seems you've made quite a name for yourself in this part of the
country." Musashi didn't try to justify himself. He hung his head and said, "I
suppose you've heard about that."
       Takuan stared at him for a few moments, seemingly comparing him with
the Takezō of old. "Why worry about that? It'd be strange if a man your age had
too good a reputation. So long as you haven't done anything disloyal or ignoble

or rebellious, what does it matter? I'm more interested in hearing about your
training."
        Musashi gave a brief account of his recent experiences and ended by
saying, "I'm afraid I'm still immature, imprudent—far from being truly
enlightened. The more I travel, the longer the road becomes. I have the feeling
I'm climbing an endless mountain path."
        "That's the way it has to be," said Takuan, clearly pleased with the youth's
integrity and humility. "If a man not yet thirty claims to know the least bit about
the Way, it's an unmistakable sign his growth has stopped. Even I still shudder
with embarrassment when anyone suggests that an uncouth priest like me could
know the ultimate meaning of Zen. It's disconcerting, the way people are always
asking me to tell them about the Buddhist Law or explain the true teachings.
People try to look up to a priest as a living Buddha. Be thankful that others don't
overestimate you, that you don't have to pay attention to appearances."
        While the two men happily renewed their friendship, servants arrived with
food and drink. Presently Takuan said, "Forgive me, your lordship. I'm afraid
we're forgetting something. Why don't you call your other guest in?"
        Musashi was certain now that he knew who the fourth person was, but
elected to remain silent.
        Hesitating slightly, Ujikatsu said, "Shall I call him?" Then, to Musashi,
"I'll have to admit you saw through our little trick. As the one who planned it, I
feel rather ashamed."
        Takuan laughed. "Good for you! I'm glad to see you're up to admitting
defeat. But why not? It was only a game to amuse everybody anyway, wasn't it?
Certainly nothing for the master of the Hōjō Style to lose face over."
        "Well, no doubt I was defeated," murmured Ujikatsu, reluctance still in his
voice. "The truth is that although I've heard what sort of man you are, I had no
way of knowing just how well trained and disciplined you are. I thought I'd see
for myself, and my other guest agreed to cooperate. When you stopped in the
passageway, he was waiting in ambush, ready to draw his sword." His lordship
seemed to regret having had to put Musashi to the test. "But you perceived you
were being lured into a trap and came across the garden." Looking directly at
Musashi, he asked, "May I ask why you did that?"
       Musashi merely grinned.
       Takuan spoke up. "It's the difference, your lordship, between the military
       strategist and the swordsman."
       "Is it, now?"

       "It's a matter of instinctive responses—that of a military scholar, based on
intellectual principles, versus that of a man who follows the Way of the Sword,
based on the heart. You reasoned that if you led Musashi on, he'd follow. Yet
without being able to actually see, or to put his finger on anything definite,
Musashi sensed danger and moved to protect himself. His reaction was
spontaneous, instinctive."
      "Instinctive?"
      "Like a Zen revelation."
      "Do you have premonitions like that?"
      "I can't really say."
       "In any case, I've learned a lesson. The average samurai, sensing danger,
might have lost his head, or perhaps seized upon the trap as an excuse to display
his prowess with the sword. When I saw Musashi go back, put on the sandals
and cross the garden, I was deeply impressed."
       Musashi kept his silence, his face revealing no special pleasure at Lord
Ujikatsu's words of praise. His thoughts turned to the man still standing outside
in the dark, stranded by the victim's failure to fall into the trap.
       Addressing his host, he said, "May I request that the Lord of Tajima take
his place among us now?"
       "What's that?" Ujikatsu was astonished, as was Takuan. "How did you
know?"
       Moving back to give Yagyū Munenori the place of honor, Musashi said,
"Despite the darkness, I felt the presence of peerless swordsmanship. Taking into
consideration the other faces present, I don't see how it could be anyone else."
       "You've done it again!" Ujikatsu was amazed.
       At a nod from him, Takuan said, "The Lord of Tajima. Quite right."
Turning to the door, he called, "Your secret is out, Lord Munenori. Won't you
join us?"
       There was a loud laugh, and Munenori appeared in the doorway. Instead of
arranging himself comfortably in front of the alcove, he knelt in front of Musashi
and greeted him as an equal, saying, "My name is Mataemon Munenori. I hope
you will remember me."
       "It is an honor to meet you. I am a rōnin from Mimasaka, Miyamoto
Musashi by name. I pray for your guidance in the future."
       "Kimura Sukekurō mentioned you to me some months ago, but at the time
I was busy because of my father's illness."
       "How is Lord Sekishūsai?"

       "Well, he's very old. There's no way of knowing . . ." After a brief pause,
he continued with warm cordiality: "My father told me about you in a letter, and
I've heard Takuan speak of you several times. I must say your reaction a few
minutes ago was admirable. If you don't mind, I think we should regard the bout
you requested as having taken place. I hope you're not offended by my
unorthodox way of carrying it out."
       Musashi's impression was of intelligence and maturity quite in accordance
with the daimyō's reputation.
       "I'm embarrassed by your thoughtfulness," he replied, bowing very low.
His show of deference was natural, for Lord Munenori's status was so far above
Musashi's as to put him virtually in another world. Though his fief amounted to
only fifty thousand bushels, his family had been famous as provincial
magistrates since the tenth century. To most people, it would have seemed odd to
find one of the shōgun's tutors in the same room with Musashi, let alone talking
to him in a friendly, informal fashion. It was a relief to Musashi to note that
neither Ujikatsu, a scholar and member of the shōgun's banner guard, nor
Takuan, a country priest by origin, felt any constraint because of Munenori's
rank.
       Warm sake was brought, cups were exchanged, talk and laughter ensued.
Differences in age and class were forgotten. Musashi knew he was being
accepted in this select circle not because of who he was. He was seeking the
Way, just as they were. It was the Way that permitted such free camaraderie.
      At one point, Takuan set down his cup and asked Musashi, "What's become
      of Otsū."
      Reddening slightly, Musashi said he hadn't seen or heard anything of her for
      some time.
      "Nothing at all?"
      "Nothing."
      "That's unfortunate. You can't leave her in the lurch forever, you know. It's
      not good for you, either."
      "By Otsū," asked Munenori, "do you mean the girl who once stayed with
      my father in Koyagyū?"
      "Yes," replied Takuan on Musashi's behalf.
      "I know where she is. She went to Koyagyū with my nephew Hyōgo to help
      nurse my father."
       With a noted military scientist and Takuan present, thought Musashi, they
could be talking about strategy or discussing Zen. With both Munenori and

Musashi present, the subject could have been swords.
       With a nod of apology to Musashi, Takuan told the others about Otsū and
her relationship with Musashi. "Sooner or later," he concluded, "someone will
have to bring the two of you together again, but I fear it's no task for a priest. I
ask the assistance of you two gentlemen." What he was actually suggesting was
that Ujikatsu and Munenori act as Musashi's guardians.
       They seemed willing to accept this role, Munenori observing that Musashi
was old enough to have a family and Ujikatsu saying that he had reached a
satisfactorily high level of training.
       Munenori suggested that one of these days Otsū should be summoned back
from Koyagyū and given in marriage to Musashi. Then Musashi could set
himself up in Edo, where his house, along with those of Ono Tadaaki and Yagyū
Munenori, would form a triumvirate of the sword and usher in a golden age of
swordsmanship in the new capital. Both Takuan and Ujikatsu concurred.
       Specifically, Lord Ujikatsu, eager to reward Musashi for his kindness to
Shinzō, wanted to recommend him as a tutor to the shōgun, an idea the three of
them had explored before sending Shinzō for Musashi. And having seen how
Musashi reacted to their test, Munenori himself was now ready to give his
approval to the plan.
       There were difficulties to be overcome, one being that a teacher in the
shōgun's household also had to be a member of the honor guard. Since many of
its members were faithful vassals of the Tokugawas from the days when Ieyasu
had held the Mikawa fief, there was a reluctance to appoint new people, and all
candidates were investigated with great thoroughness. However, it was felt that
with recommendations from Ujikatsu and Munenori, together with a letter of
guarantee from Takuan, Musashi would get by.
       The sticky point was his ancestry. There was no written record tracing his
ancestry back to Hirata Shōgen of the Akamatsu clan, nor even a genealogical
chart to prove he was of good samurai stock. He assuredly had no family
connections with the Tokugawas. On the contrary, it was an undeniable fact that
as a callow youth of seventeen he had fought against the Tokugawa forces at
Sekigahara. Still, there was a chance; other rōnin from former enemy clans had
joined the House of Tokugawa after Sekigahara. Even Ono Tadaaki, a rōnin from
the Kitabatake clan, which was at present in hiding in Ise Matsuzaka, held an
appointment as tutor to the shōgun despite his undesirable connections.
       After the three men had again gone over the pros and cons, Takuan said,
"All right then, let's recommend him. But perhaps we should find out what he

himself thinks about it."
       The question was put to Musashi, who replied mildly, "It's kind and
generous of you to suggest this, but I'm nothing but an immature young man."
       "Don't think of it in that way," said Takuan with an air of candor. "What
we're advising you to do is become mature. Will you establish a house of your
own, or do you plan to make Otsū go on indefinitely living as she is now?"
       Musashi felt hemmed in. Otsū had said she was willing to bear any
hardship, but this would in no way lessen Musashi's responsibility for any grief
that might befall her. While it was acceptable for a woman to act in accordance
with her own feelings, if the outcome was not a happy one, the man would be
blamed.
       Not that Musashi was unwilling to accept the responsibility. On the whole,
he yearned to accept. Otsū had been guided by love, and the onus of that love
belonged to him as much as to her. Nevertheless, he felt it was still too early to
marry and have a family. The long, hard Way of the Sword stretched before him
yet; his desire to follow it was undiminished.
       It did not simplify matters that his attitude toward the sword had changed.
Since Hōtengahara, the sword of the conqueror and the sword of the killer were
things of the past, no longer of any use or meaning.
       Nor did being a technician, even one who gave instruction to men of the
shōgun's retinue, excite his interest. The Way of the Sword, as he had come to
see it, must have specific objectives: to establish order, to protect and refine the
spirit. The Way had to be one men could cherish as they did their lives, until
their dying day. If such a Way existed, could it not be employed to bring peace to
the world and happiness to all?
       When he had answered Sukekurō's letter with a challenge to Lord
Munenori, his motive had not been the shallow urge to score a victory that had
led him to challenge Sekishūsai. Now his wish was to be engaged in the business
of governing. Not on any grand scale, of course; a small, insignificant fief would
suffice for the activities he imagined would promote the cause of good
government.
       But he lacked the confidence to express these ideas, feeling that other
swordsmen would dismiss his youthful ambitions as being absurd. Or, if they
took him seriously, they would feel compelled to warn him: politics leads to
destruction; by going into government he would sully his beloved sword. They
would do this out of genuine concern for his soul.
       He even believed that if he spoke his mind truthfully, the two warriors and

the priest would react either with laughter or with alarm.
     When he did get around to speaking, it was to protest—he was too young,
     too immature, his training was inadequate... .
     At length, Takuan cut him off, saying, "Leave it to us."
     Lord Ujikatsu added, "We'll see that it turns out all right for you." The
     matter was decided.
      Coming in periodically to trim the lamp, Shinzō had caught the gist of the
conversation. He quietly let his father and the guests know that what he had
heard pleased him immensely.
