The Pomegranate


       Takuan and Iori arrived at Lord Hōjō Ujikatsu's mansion in Ushigome later
the same day. A young retainer stationed at the gate went to announce Takuan,
and a few minutes later Shinzō came out.
       "My father is at Edo Castle," said Shinzō. "Won't you come in and wait?"
"At the castle?" said Takuan. "I'll go on then, since that's where I was headed
anyway. Would you mind if I left Iori here with you?"
       "Not at all," replied Shinzō with a smile and a quick glance at Iori. "May I
order a palanquin for you?"
       "If you would."
       The lacquered palanquin was barely out of sight before Iori was at the
stables, inspecting Lord Ujikatsu's well-fed chestnut browns and dappled grays
one by one. He particularly admired their faces, which he thought much more
aristocratic than those of workhorses of his acquaintance. There was a mystery
here, though: how could the warrior class afford to keep large numbers of horses
standing idle, instead of having them out working the fields?
       He was just beginning to imagine cavalrymen riding into battle when
Shinzō's loud voice distracted him. He looked toward the house, expecting a
scolding, but saw that the object of Shinzō's wrath was a thin old woman with a
staff and a stubbornly set face.
       "Pretending to be out!" shouted Shinzō. "Why would my father have to
pretend to an old hag he doesn't even know?"
       "My, aren't you angry?" Osugi said sarcastically. "I gather you're his
lordship's son. Do you know how many times I've come here trying to see your
father? Not a few, I'll tell you, and every time I've been told he's out."
       A little rattled, Shinzō said, "It doesn't have anything to do with how many
times you come. My father doesn't like to receive people. If he doesn't want to
see you, why do you keep coming back?"
       Undaunted, Osugi cackled, "Doesn't like to see people! Why does he live
among them, then?" She bared her teeth.
       The idea of calling her a dirty name and letting her hear the click of his
sword being released crossed Shinzō's mind, but he didn't want to make an
unseemly show of temper, nor was he sure it would work.

       "My father is not here," he said in an ordinary tone of voice. "Why don't
you sit down and tell me what this is all about?"
       "Well, I think I'll accept your kind offer. It's been a long walk and my legs
are tired." She sat down on the edge of the step and began rubbing her knees.
"When you speak softly to me, young man, I feel ashamed for raising my voice.
Now, I want you to convey what I say to your father when he comes home."
      "I'll be glad to do that."
      "I came to tell him about Miyamoto Musashi."
      Puzzled, Shinzō asked, "Has something happened to Musashi?"
       "No, I want your father to know what kind of man he is. When Musashi
was seventeen, he went to Sekigahara and fought against the Tokugawas.
Against the Tokugawas, do you hear? What's more, he's done so many evil deeds
in Mimasaka that no one there has anything good to say about him. He killed any
number of people, and he's been running away from me for years because I've
been trying to take my rightful revenge on him. Musashi's a useless vagabond,
and he's dangerous!"
       "Now, wait—"
       "No, just listen! Musashi started playing around with the woman my son
was engaged to. He actually stole her and made off with her."
      "Hold on now," said Shinzō, raising his hand in protest. "Why tell such
      stories about Musashi?"
      "I'm doing it for the sake of the country," Osugi said smugly.
      "What good will it do the country to slander Musashi?"
       Osugi rearranged herself and said, "I hear that slick-tongued rogue is soon
to be appointed an instructor in the shōgun's house."
       "Where did you hear that?"
       "A man who was at the Ono dōjō. I heard it with my own ears." "Did you,
now?"
       "A swine like Musashi shouldn't even be allowed in the shōgun's presence,
let alone be appointed tutor. A teacher to the House of Tokugawa is a teacher to
the nation. It makes me sick just to think of it. I'm here to warn Lord Hōjō,
because I hear he recommended Musashi. Do you understand now?" She sucked
in the saliva at the corners of her mouth and went on: "I'm sure it's to the
country's benefit to warn your father. And let me warn you too. Be careful you
don't get taken in by Musashi's smooth talk."
       Fearing she might go on in this vein for hours, Shinzō summoned his last
ounce of patience, swallowed hard and said, "Thank you. I understand what

you've said. I'll pass it on to my father."
      "Please do!"
      With the air of someone who has finally achieved a cherished goal, Osugi
got up and walked toward the gate, her sandals flopping noisily on the path.
"Filthy old hag!" cried a boyish voice.
      Startled, Osugi barked, "What? ... What?" and looked around until she
spotted Iori among the trees, showing his teeth like a horse.
      "Eat that!" he shouted, and flung a pomegranate at her. It struck so hard it
broke.
      "Ow-w-w!" screamed Osugi, clutching at her chest.
      She bent to pick up something to throw at him, but he ran out of sight. She
ran to the stable and was looking inside when a large, soft lump of horse manure
struck her squarely in the face.
      Sputtering and spitting, Osugi wiped the mess from her face with her
fingers, and the tears began to flow. To think that traveling about the country on
her son's behalf had led to this sort of thing!
      Iori watched at a safe distance from behind a tree. Seeing her weeping like
an infant, he was suddenly very ashamed of himself. He half wanted to go and
apologize to her before she got out the gate, but his fury at hearing her malign
Musashi had not subsided. Caught between pity and hatred, he stood there for a
time biting his fingernails.
      "Come up here, Iori. You can see the red Fuji." Shinzō's voice came from a
room high up on the hill.
      With a great sense of relief, Iori ran off. "Mount Fuji?" The vision of the
peak dyed crimson in the evening light emptied his mind of all other thoughts.
      Shinzō, too, seemed to have forgotten his conversation with Osugi.
