The Poignancy of Things


       Musashi said it was the worst storm he'd ever seen.
       Iori gazed wistfully at the sodden, tattered book pages scattered hither and
yon, and thought sadly: "No more studying."
       Two days of autumn—the two hundred tenth and two hundred twentieth
days of the year—were especially dreaded by farmers. It was on these two days
that typhoons were most likely to destroy the rice crop. Iori, more attuned to the
dangers than his master, had taken the precaution of tying down the roof and
weighting it with rocks. Nevertheless, during the night, the wind had ripped the
roof off, and when it was light enough to inspect the damage, it was evident that
the cabin was beyond any hope of repair.
       With his experience at Hōtengahara in mind, Musashi set off shortly after
dawn. Watching him go, Iori thought: "What good will it do him to look at the
neighbors' paddies? Of course they're flooded. Doesn't his own house mean
anything to him?"
       He built a fire, using bits and pieces of the walls and floor, and roasted
some chestnuts and dead birds for breakfast. The smoke stung his eyes.
       Musashi came back a little after noon. About an hour later, a group of
farmers wearing thick straw rain capes arrived to offer their thanks—for
assistance to a sick person, for help in draining off the flood water, for a number
of other services. As one old man admitted, "We always get into quarrels at
times like these, what with everybody in a hurry to take care of his own
problems first. But today we followed your advice and worked together."
       They also brought gifts of food—sweets, pickles and, to Iori's delight, rice
cakes. As he thought about it, Iori decided that that day he'd learned a lesson: if
one forgot about oneself and worked for the group, food would naturally be
forthcoming.
       "We'll build you a new house," one farmer promised. "One that won't be
blown down." For the present, he invited them to stay at his house, the oldest in
the village. When they got there, the man's wife hung their clothes out to dry,
and when they were ready to go to bed, they were shown to separate rooms.
       Before he fell asleep, Iori became aware of a sound that stirred his interest.
Turning over to face Musashi's room, he whispered through the shoji, "Do you

hear that, sir?"
        "Umm?"
        "Listen. You can just hear them—drums from the shrine dances. Strange,
isn't it, having religious dances the night after a typhoon?"
        The only reply was the sound of deep breathing.
        The next morning, Iori got up early and asked the farmer about the drums.
Coming back to Musashi's room, he said brightly, "Mitsumine Shrine in
Chichibu isn't so far from here, is it?"
        "I shouldn't think so."
        "I wish you'd take me there. To pay my respects."
        Puzzled, Musashi asked why the sudden interest and was told that the
drummers had been musicians in a neighboring village, practicing for the
Asagaya Sacred Dance, which their household had specialized in since the
distant past. They went every month to perform at the Mitsumine Shrine
Festival.
        The beauty of music and the dance was known to Iori only through these
Shinto dances. He was inordinately fond of them, and having heard that the
Mitsumine dances were one of the three great types in this tradition, he had his
heart set on seeing them.
        "Won't you take me?" he pleaded. "It'll be five or six days, at least, before
our house is ready."
        Iori's fervency reminded Musashi of Jōtarō, who had often made a
nuisance of himself—whining, pouting, purring—to get what he wanted. Iori, so
grown up and self-sufficient for his age, rarely resorted to such tactics. Musashi
wasn't thinking about it particularly, but an observer might have noticed the
effects of his influence. One thing he had deliberately taught Iori was to make a
strict distinction between himself and his teacher.
        At first he replied noncommittally, but after a little thought, he said, "All
right, I'll take you."
        Iori jumped in the air, exclaiming, "The weather's good too." Within five
minutes, he'd reported his good fortune to their host, requested box lunches and
procured new straw sandals. Then he was in front of his teacher again, asking,
"Shouldn't we get started?"
        The farmer saw them off with the promise that their house would be
finished by the time they returned.
        They passed places where the typhoon had left ponds, small lakes almost,
in its wake, but otherwise it was difficult to believe the heavens had unleashed

their fury only two days earlier. Shrikes flew low in the clear blue sky.
       The first night, they chose a cheap inn in the village of Tanashi and went to
bed early. The next day, their road led them farther into the great Musashino
Plain.
       Their journey was interrupted for several hours at the Iruma River, which
was swollen to three times its normal size. Only a short section of the dirt bridge
stood, uselessly, in the middle of the stream.
       While Musashi watched a group of farmers carrying new piling out from
both sides to make a temporary crossing, Iori noticed some old arrowheads and
remarked on them, adding, "There's tops of helmets too. There must have been a
battle here." He amused himself along the riverbank, digging up arrowheads,
rusted fragments of broken swords and miscellaneous pieces of old,
unidentifiable metal.
      Suddenly he snatched his hand away from a white object he'd been about to
      pick up.
      "It's a human bone," he cried.
      "Bring it over here," said Musashi.
      Iori had no stomach for touching it again. "What are you going to do with
      it?"
      "'Bury it where it won't be walked on."
      "It's not just a couple of bones. There're lots of them."
       "Good. It'll give us something to do. Bring all you can find." Turning his
back to the river, he said, "You can bury them over there, where those gentians
are blooming."
       "I don't have a spade."
       "You can use a broken sword."
       When the hole was deep enough, Iori put the bones in it, then gathered up
his collection of arrowheads and bits of metal and buried them with the bones.
"Is that all right?" he asked.
       "Put some rocks over it. Make it into a proper memorial."
       "When was there a battle here?"
       "Have you forgotten? You must have read about it. The Taiheiki tells about
two fierce battles, in 1333 and 1352, in a place called Kotesashigahara. That's
about where we are now. On one side was the Nitta family, supporting the
Southern Court, and on the other a huge army led by Ashikaga Takauji."
       "Oh, the battles of Kotesashigahara. I remember now."
       At Musashi's urging, Iori continued. "The book tells us Prince Munenaga

lived in the eastern region for a long time and studied the Way of the Samurai,
but was astonished when the Emperor appointed him shōgun." "What was the
poem he composed on that occasion?" Musashi asked. Iori glanced up at a bird
soaring through the azure sky and recited:


           "How could I have known
           I'd ever be master of
           The catalpa bow?
           Had I not passed through
           life
           Without touching it?"


     "And the poem in the chapter telling how he crossed into Musashi
Province and fought at Kotesashigahara?"
     The boy hesitated, biting his lip, then began, in phrasing largely of his own
making:


           "Why, then, should I cling
           To a life that is fulfilled
           When nobly given
           For the sake of our great
           lord,
           For the sake of the people?"


     "And the meaning?"
     "I understand that."
     "Are you sure?"
       "Anyone who can't understand without having it explained to him isn't
really Japanese, even if he is a samurai. Isn't that true?"
       "Yes. But tell me, Iori, if that's the case, why are you behaving as though
handling those bones made your hands dirty?"
       "Would it make you feel good to handle the bones of dead people?"
       "The men who died here were soldiers. They'd fought and perished for the

sentiments expressed in Prince Munenaga's poem. The number of samurai like
that is uncountable; their bones, buried in the earth, are the foundation on which
this country is built. Were it not for them, we'd still have neither peace nor the
prospect of prosperity.
       "Wars, like the typhoon we had, pass. The land as a whole is unchanged,
but we must never forget the debt we owe to the white bones under the ground."
       Iori nodded at almost every word. "I understand now. Shall I make an
offering of flowers and bow before the bones I buried?"
       Musashi laughed. "Bowing's not really necessary, if you keep the memory
alive in your heart."
       "But ..." Not quite satisfied, the boy picked some flowers and placed them
before the pile of stones. He was about to clasp his hands together in obeisance
when another troubling thought came to him. "Sir, it's all well and good if these
bones really belonged to samurai who were loyal to the Emperor. But what if
they're the remains of Ashikaga Takauji's men? I wouldn't want to pay respect to
them."
       Iori stared at him, waiting for his answer. Musashi fixed his eyes on the
thin sliver of daylight moon. But no satisfactory reply came to mind.
       At length, he said, "In Buddhism there is salvation even for those guilty of
the ten evils and the five deadly sins. The heart itself is enlightenment. The
Buddha forgives the wicked if only they'll open their eyes to his wisdom."
       "Does that mean loyal warriors and evil rebels are the same after they
die?"
       "No!" Musashi said emphatically. "A samurai holds his name to be sacred.
If he sullies it, there's no redress throughout all generations."
       "Then why does the Buddha treat bad people and loyal servants alike?"
       "Because people are all fundamentally the same. There are those who are
so blinded by self-interest and desire that they become rebels or brigands. The
Buddha is willing to overlook this. He urges all to accept enlightenment, to open
their eyes to true wisdom. This is the message of a thousand scriptures. Of
course, when one dies, all becomes void."
       "I see," said Iori, without really seeing. He pondered the matter for a few
minutes and then asked, "But that's not true of samurai, is it? Not everything
becomes void when a samurai dies."
      "Why do you say that?"
      "His name lives on, doesn't it?"
      "That's true."

       "If it's a bad name, it stays bad. If it's a good name, it stays good, even
when the samurai is reduced to bones. Isn't that the way it is?"
       "Yes, but it isn't really quite so simple," said Musashi, wondering if he
could successfully guide his pupil's curiosity. "In the case of a samurai, there is
such a thing as an appreciation of the poignancy of things. A warrior lacking this
sensitivity is like a shrub in a desert. To be a strong fighter and nothing more is
to be like a typhoon. It's the same with swordsmen who think of nothing but
swords, swords, swords. A real samurai, a genuine swordsman, has a
compassionate heart. He understands the poignancy of life."
       Silently, Iori rearranged the flowers and clasped his hands.
