The Challenge


       Iori was bored after only a few days at the Hōjō residence. There was
nothing to do but play.
       "When's Takuan coming back?" he asked Shinzō one morning, really
wanting to know what had happened to Musashi.
       "My father is still at the castle, so I suppose Takuan is too," said Shinzō.
"They'll be back sooner or later. Why don't you amuse yourself with the horses?"
       Iori raced to the stable and threw a lacquer and mother-of-pearl saddle on
his favorite steed. He had ridden the horse both the day before and the day
before that without telling Shinzō. Receiving permission made him feel proud.
He mounted and tore out the back gate at full gallop.
       The houses of daimyō, the paths through the fields, the rice paddies, the
forests—the sights came at him in rapid succession and were left behind just as
rapidly. Bright red snake gourds and russet grass proclaimed that autumn was at
its height. The Chichibu Range rose beyond Musashino Plain. "He's in those
mountains somewhere," thought Iori. He envisioned his beloved master in jail,
and the tears on his cheeks made the wind feel soothingly cool.
       Why not go see Musashi? Without giving the matter further thought, he
whipped the horse, and horse and rider surged through the silvery sea of fluffy
eulalia.
       After covering a mile at breakneck speed, he reined in the horse, thinking:
"Maybe he's gone back to the house."
       He found the new house finished but unlived in. At the nearest paddy, he
called out to the farmers harvesting their rice, "Has anyone seen my teacher?"
They shook their heads sadly in reply.
       Then it had to be Chichibu. On horseback, he could make the journey in a
day.
       After a time he came to the village of Nobidome. The entrance to the
village was virtually blocked by samurai's mounts, packhorses, traveling chests,
palanquins and between forty and fifty samurai having their lunch. He turned
around to look for a way around the village.
      Three or four samurai's attendants came running after him.
      "Hey, you rascal, wait!"

      "What're you calling me?" Iori asked angrily.
      "Off the horse!" They were on either side of him now.
      "Why? I don't even know you."
      "Just keep your mouth shut and get off."
      "No! You can't make me!"
       Before he knew what was happening, one of the men lifted Iori's right leg
high in the air, tumbling him off the other side of the horse.
       "Someone wants to see you. Come along with me." He took hold of Iori's
collar and pulled him toward a roadside teahouse.
       Osugi stood outside, a cane in one hand. With a wave of her other hand,
she dismissed the attendants. She was dressed for traveling and in the company
of all those samurai. Iori didn't know what to make of it, nor did he have time to
give it much thought.
       "Brat!" said Osugi, then she whacked him across the shoulder with her
cane. He went through the motions of taking a stance, though he knew he was
hopelessly outnumbered. "Musashi has only the best of disciples. Ha! I hear
you're one of them."
      "I ... I wouldn't say things like that if I were you."
      "Oh, wouldn't you now?"
      "I ... I don't have any business with you."
      "Oh, yes you do. You're going to tell us a few things. Who sent you to
      follow us?"
      "Follow you?" Iori asked with a snort of disdain.
      "How dare you talk that way!" the old woman screeched. "Hasn't Musashi
      taught you any manners?"
      "I don't need any lessons from you. I'm leaving."
       "No you aren't!" cried Osugi as she caught him on the shin with her cane.
"O-w-w!" Iori collapsed to the ground.
       Attendants grabbed the boy and marched him over to the miller's shop by
the village gate, where sat a samurai of obviously high rank. He had finished
eating and was sipping hot water. Seeing Iori's predicament, he broke into a grin.
       "Dangerous," thought the boy, as his eyes met Kojirō's.
       With a look of triumph, Osugi thrust out her chin and said, "See! Just as I
thought—it was Iori. What's Musashi got up his sleeve now? Who else could
have sent him to follow us?"
      "Umm," mumbled Kojirō, nodding and dismissing his attendants, one of
      whom asked if he wanted the boy tied up.

      Kojirō smiled and shook his head. Held by Kojirō's eyes, Iori was unable to
      stand straight, let alone run away.
      Kojirō said, "You heard what she said. Is it true?"
      "No; I just came out for a ride. I wasn't following you or anybody else."
       "Hmm, could be. If Musashi's any kind of a samurai, he wouldn't resort to
cheap tricks." Then he began thinking out loud. "On the other hand, if he heard
we'd suddenly left on a trip with a contingent of Hosokawa samurai, he might
get suspicious and send someone to check on our movements. It would only be
natural."
       The change in Kojirō's circumstances was striking. Instead of the forelock,
his head was shaved in proper samurai fashion. And in place of the loud clothing
he used to wear, he had on a solid black kimono, which together with his rustic
hakama made a most conservative impression. The Drying Pole he now carried
at his side. His hope of becoming a vassal in the House of Hosokawa had been
realized—not for the five thousand bushels he had wanted but for a stipend
about half that large.
       The present entourage, under the command of Kakubei, was an advance
party on the way to Buzen to make things ready for Hosokawa Tadatoshi's
return. With his father's age foremost in his mind, he had submitted his request
to the shogunate quite some time earlier. Permission had finally been granted, an
indication that the shogunate had no qualms about the Hosokawas' loyalty.
       Osugi had asked to come along because she felt it imperative to return
home. She had not relinquished her position as head of the family, yet she had
been absent for nearly ten years. Uncle Gon might have looked after things for
her if he were still alive. As it was, she suspected there were a number of family
matters awaiting her attention.
       They would be going through Osaka, where she had left Uncle Gon's
ashes. She would be able to carry them to Mimasaka and hold a memorial
service. It had been a long time, too, since she'd held a service for her neglected
ancestors. She could return to her quest after she had straightened out affairs at
home.
       Recently she'd felt pleased with herself, believing she had struck a strong
blow against Musashi. On first hearing of his recommendation from Kojirō, she
had fallen into a state of extreme depression. If Musashi were to receive the
appointment, he would be that much farther from her reach.
       She'd taken it upon herself to prevent this disaster to the shogunate and the
nation from happening. She hadn't seen Takuan, but she visited the .House of

Yagyū as well as the House of Hōjō, denouncing Musashi, claiming that it would
be a dangerous folly to raise him to a high station. Not content with that, she
reiterated her calumnies at the house of every government minister whose
servants allowed her through the gate.
       Kojirō, of course, made no effort to stop her, but he offered no special
encouragement either, knowing that she wouldn't rest until she had done a
thorough job. And thorough it was: she even wrote malicious letters about
Musashi's past and threw them into the compounds of the Commissioner of Edo
and the members of the Council of Elders. Before she was done, even Kojirō
wondered if she hadn't gone too far.
       Kojirō encouraged Osugi to make the journey, believing it would be better
for him if she was back in the country where she could do a minimum of harm.
If Osugi had any regret, it was only that Matahachi was not going with her, for
she was still convinced that someday he would see the light and return to her.
       Iori had no way of knowing the circumstances. Unable to flee, loath to cry
for fear it would discredit Musashi, he felt trapped among enemies. Deliberately,
Kojirō stared directly into the boy's eyes and to his surprise found his stare
returned. Not once did Iori's eyes waver.
       "Do you have brush and ink?" Kojirō asked Osugi.
       "Yes, but the ink's all dried up. Why?"
       "I want to write a letter. The signs Yajibei's men put up didn't draw
Musashi out, and I don't know where he is. Iori is the best messenger one could
ask for. I think I should send Musashi a note on the occasion of my departure
from Edo."
       "What are you going to write?"
       "Nothing elaborate. I'll tell him to practice his swordsmanship and visit me
in Buzen one of these days. I'll let him know I'm willing to wait the rest of my
life. He can come whenever he has the necessary confidence."
       Osugi threw up her hands in horror. "How can you talk like that? The rest
of your life, indeed! I haven't got that much time to wait. I must see Musashi
dead within the next two or three years at most."
      "Leave it to me. I'll take care of your problem at the same time I take care
      of mine."
      "Can't you see I'm getting old? It has to be done while I'm still alive."
      "If you look after yourself, you'll be around when my invincible sword does
      its work."
       Kojirō took the writing kit and walked to a nearby stream, where he wet

his finger to moisten the ink stick. Still standing, he took some paper from his
kimono. He wrote quickly, but both his calligraphy and his composition were
those of an expert.
       "You can use this for paste," said Osugi, taking a few grains of cooked rice
and placing them on a leaf. Kojirō mashed them between his fingers, spread the
stuff along the edge of the letter and sealed it. On the back, he wrote: "From
Sasaki Ganryū, Retainer to the House of Hosokawa."
       "Come here, you. I'm not going to hurt you. I want you to take this letter to
Musashi. Make sure he gets it, because it's important."
      Iori hung back a minute but then grunted his assent and snatched the letter
      from Kojirō's hand. "What's written in it?"
      "Just what I told the old lady."
      "May I look at it?"
      "You aren't to break the seal."
      "If you wrote something insulting, I won't take it."
       "There's nothing rude in it. I asked him to remember our promise for the
future and told him I look forward to seeing him again, perhaps in Buzen, if he
should happen to come there."
       "What do you mean by 'seeing him again'?"
       "I mean meeting him on the boundary between life and death." Kojirō's
cheeks reddened slightly.
       Stuffing the letter into his kimono, Iori said, "All right, I'll deliver it," and
ran off. About thirty yards away, he stopped, turned and stuck out his tongue at
Osugi. "Crazy old witch!" he shouted.
       "Wh-what?" She was ready to go after him, but Kojirō took her arm and
held her back.
       "Let it pass," he said with a rueful smile. "He's only a child." Then to Iori
he shouted, "Don't you have anything better to say?"
       "No . . ." Tears of anger rose from his chest. "You'll be sorry, though.
There isn't any way Musashi could lose to the likes of you."
       "Just like him, aren't you? Never say die. But I like the way you stick up
for him. If he ever dies, come to me. I'll put you to work sweeping the garden or
something."
       Not knowing Kojirō was only teasing, Iori was insulted to the marrow. He
picked up a rock. When he raised his arm to throw it, Kojirō fixed his eyes on
him.
       "Don't do that," he said in a calm but forceful voice.

      Iori, feeling the eyes had hit him like two bullets, dropped the stone and
ran. He ran on and on until, completely exhausted, he collapsed in the middle of
Musashino Plain.


       He sat there for two hours thinking about the man he looked up to as his
teacher. Though he knew Musashi had many enemies, he thought of him as a
great man and wanted to become a great man himself. Believing he had to do
something to fulfill his obligations to his master and ensure his safety, he
resolved to develop his own strength as quickly as possible.
       Then the memory of the terrifying light in Kojirō's eyes came back to
haunt him. Wondering whether Musashi could defeat a man that strong, he
pessimistically decided even his master would have to study and practice harder.
He got to his feet.
       The white mist rolling down from the mountains spread over the plain.
Deciding he should go on to Chichibu and deliver Kojirō's letter, he suddenly
remembered the horse. Fearing bandits might have got hold of it, he searched
frantically, calling and whistling at every other step.
       He seemed to hear the sound of hooves coming from the direction of what
he took to be a pond. He ran toward it. But there was no horse, no pond. The
shimmering mist receded into the distance.
       Seeing a moving black object, he approached it. A wild boar stopped
rooting for food and charged dangerously close to him. The boar was swallowed
up in the reeds and in its wake the mist formed a white line, looking as if it had
been spread by a magician's wand. As he gazed at it, he became conscious of
gurgling water. Going closer, he saw the reflection of the moon in a rocky brook.
       He had always been sensitive to the mysteries of the open plain. He firmly
believed that the tiniest ladybird possessed the spiritual power of the gods. In his
eyes, nothing was without a soul, neither fluttering leaves nor beckoning water
nor driving wind. Surrounded now by nature, he experienced the tremulous
loneliness of autumn nearly gone, the sad wistfulness that must be felt by grasses
and insects and water.
       He sobbed so hard his shoulders shook—sweet tears, not bitter ones. If
some being other than a human—a star perhaps, or the spirit of the plain—had
asked him why he was weeping, he wouldn't have been able to say. If the
inquiring spirit had persisted, soothing and coaxing him, he might finally have
said, "I often cry when I'm out in the open. I always have the feeling the house in

Hōtengahara is somewhere near."
      Crying was refreshment for his soul. After he had cried to his heart's
content, heaven and earth would comfort him. When the tears were dry, his spirit
would come forth from the clouds clean and fresh.
     "That's Iori, isn't it?"
     "I believe it is."
     Iori turned toward the voices and the two human figures standing out
     blackly against the evening sky.
      "Sensei!" cried Iori, stumbling as he ran toward the man on horseback. "It's
you!" Beside himself with joy, he clung to the stirrup and looked up to make sure
he wasn't dreaming.
      "What happened?" asked Musashi. "What are you doing out here alone?"
Musashi's face seemed to be very thin—was it the moonlight?—but the warmth
of the voice was what Iori had hungered for weeks to hear.
     "I thought I'd go to Chichibu—" The saddle caught Iori's eye. "Why, this is
     the horse I was riding!"
     Gonnosuke, laughing, said, "Is it yours?"
     "Yes."
      "We didn't know who it belonged to. It was wandering around near the
Iruma River, so I regarded it as a gift from heaven to Musashi."
     "The god of the plain must have sent the horse to meet you," said Iori with
     perfect sincerity.
     "Your horse, you say? That saddle couldn't belong to a samurai getting less
     than five thousand bushels."
     "Well, it's really Shinzō's."
     Dismounting, Musashi asked, "You've been staying at his house, then?"
     "Yes. Takuan took me there."
     "What about our new house?"
     "It's finished."
     "Good. We can go back there."
      "Sensei . . ."
     "Yes."
     "You're so thin. Why's that?"
     "I've spent quite a bit of time meditating."
     "How did you get out of prison?"
     "You can hear about it from Gonnosuke later. For now, let's say the gods
     were on my side."

      "You don't have to worry anymore, Iori," said Gonnosuke. "No one has any
      doubts about his innocence."
       Relieved, Iori became quite talkative, telling them about his meeting with
Jōtarō and Jōtarō's going to Edo. When he came to the "repulsive old woman"
who had showed up at the Hōjō mansion, he remembered Kojirō's letter.
       "Oh, I forgot something important," he exclaimed, and handed the letter to
Musashi.
       "A letter from Kojirō?" Surprised, he held it in his hand for a moment as
though it were a missive from a long-lost friend. "Where did you see him?" he
asked.
       "At the village of Nobidome. That mean old woman was with him. He said
he was going to Buzen."
       "Oh?"
       "He was with a lot of Hosokawa samurai.... Sensei, you better be on your
toes and not take any chances."
       Musashi stuffed the unopened letter into his kimono and nodded.
       Not certain his meaning had got through, Iori said, "That Kojirō's very
strong, isn't he? Has he got something against you?" He related to Musashi every
detail of his encounter with the enemy.
       When they reached the cabin, Iori went down to the bottom of the hill to
get food, and Gonnosuke gathered wood and fetched water.
       They sat down around the fire burning brightly in the hearth, and savored
the pleasure of seeing each other safe and sound again. It was then that Iori
noticed the fresh scars and bruises on Musashi's arms and neck.
       "How did you get all those marks?" he asked. "You're covered with them."
"It's nothing important. Did you feed the horse?"
       "Yes, sir."
       "Tomorrow you must return it."
       Early the next morning, Iori mounted the horse and galloped off for a short
ride before breakfast. When the sun was above the horizon, he brought the horse
to a halt and gaped in awe.
       Racing back to the cabin, he yelled, "Sensei, get up. Quick! It's like when
we saw it from the mountain in Chichibu. The sun—it's huge, and it looks like
it's going to roll over the plain. Get up, Gonnosuke."
       "Good morning," said Musashi from the grove, where he was taking a
stroll. Too excited to think about breakfast, Iori said, "I'm going now," and rode
off.

      Musashi watched as boy and horse took on the semblance of a crow at the
very center of the sun. The black spot grew smaller and smaller, until at last it
was absorbed by the great flaming orb.
