Two Drumsticks


        Halfway up the mountain, antlike human figures, climbing in continual
procession, were swallowed up by a thick ring of clouds. Emerging near the
summit, where Mitsumine Shrine was situated, they were greeted by a cloudless
sky.
        The mountain's three peaks, Kumotori, Shiraiwa and Myōhōgatake,
straddled four eastern provinces. Within the Shinto complex there were Buddhist
temples, pagodas, various other buildings and gates. Outside was a flourishing
little town, with teahouses and souvenir shops, the offices of the high priests and
the houses of some seventy farmers whose produce was reserved for the shrine's
use.
        "Listen! They've started playing the big drums," Iori said excitedly,
gobbling down his rice and red beans. Musashi sat opposite, enjoying his repast
at a leisurely pace.
       Iori threw down his chopsticks. "The music's started," he said. "Let's go and
       watch."
       "I had enough last night. You go alone."
       "But they only did two dances last night. Don't you want to see the others?"
       "Not if it means hurrying."
        Seeing his master's wooden bowl was still half full, Iori said in a calmer
tone, "Thousands of people have arrived since yesterday. It'd be a shame if it
rained."
        "Oh?"
        When Musashi finally said, "Shall we go now?" Iori bounded for the front
door like a dog unleashed, borrowed some straw sandals, and set them in place
on the doorstep for his master.
        In front of the Kannon'in, the subtemple where they were staying, and on
both sides of the shrine's main gate, great bonfires blazed. Every house had a
lighted torch in front of it, and the whole area, several thousand feet above sea
level, was as bright as day. Overhead, in a sky the color of a deep lake, the River
of Heaven glittered like magic smoke, while in the street swarms of men and
women, oblivious of the chill in the mountain air, surged toward the stage where
the sacred dances were performed. Flutes and great drums echoed on the

mountain breeze. The stage itself was empty, except for the gently fluttering
banners that would soon serve as a backdrop.
        Jostled by the mob, Iori got separated from Musashi but quickly pushed
his way through the crowd until he spied him standing near a building, staring up
at a list of donors. Iori called his name, ran up to him, tugged at his sleeve, but
Musashi's attention was riveted on one plaque, larger than the others. It stood out
from all the rest because of the size of the contribution made by "Daizō of Narai,
Shibaura Village, Province of Musashi."
        The booming of the drums built to a crescendo.
        "They've started the dance," squealed Iori, his heart flying to the sacred
dance pavilion. "Sensei, what are you looking at?"
        Musashi, stirred from his reverie, said, "Oh, nothing special.... I just
remembered something I have to do. You go watch the dances. I'll be along
later."
        Musashi sought out the office of the Shinto priests, where he was greeted
by an old man.
        "I'd like to inquire about a donor," said Musashi.
        "Sorry, we don't have anything to do with that here. You'll have to go to
the residence of the chief Buddhist priest. I'll show you where it is."
        Though Mitsumine Shrine was Shinto, general supervision of the whole
establishment was in the hands of a Buddhist prelate. The plaque over the gate
read: "Office of the High Priest in Charge," in suitably large characters.
        At the entrance hall, the old man talked at some length with the priest on
duty. When they were finished, the priest invited Musashi inside and very
politely led him to an inner room. Tea was served, along with a tray of splendid
cakes. Next came a second tray, followed shortly by a handsome young acolyte
bearing sake. Presently no less a personage than a provisional bishop appeared.
        "Welcome to our mountain," he said. "I fear we have only simple country
fare to offer you. I trust you'll forgive us. Please make yourself comfortable."
        Musashi was at a loss to understand the solicitous treatment. Without
touching the sake, he said, "I came to make an inquiry about one of your
donors."
        "What?" The benign countenance of the priest, a rotund man of about fifty,
underwent a subtle alteration. "An inquiry?" he asked suspiciously.
        In rapid succession, Musashi asked when Daizō had come to the temple,
whether he came there often, whether he ever brought anyone with him, and if
so, what sort of person.

       With every question the priest's displeasure grew, until finally he said,
"Then you're not here to make a contribution but merely to ask questions about
someone who did?" His face was a study in exasperation.
       "The old man must have misunderstood me. I never intended to make a
donation. I only wanted to ask about Daizō."
       "You could have made that perfectly clear at the entrance," the priest said
haughtily. "From all I can see, you're a rōnin. I don't know who you are or where
you come from. You must understand that I can't give out information about our
donors to just anyone."
       "I assure you nothing will happen."
       "Well, you'll have to see the priest in charge of such matters." Looking as
though he felt he'd been robbed, he dismissed Musashi.
       The register of contributors turned out to be no more helpful, for it
recorded only that Daizō had been there several times. Musashi thanked the
priest and left.
       Near the dance pavilion, he looked around for Iori without seeing him. If
he'd looked up, he would have. The boy was almost directly over his head,
having climbed a tree to get a better view.
       Watching the scene unfolding on the stage, Musashi was transported back
to his childhood, to the night festivals at the Sanumo Shrine in Miyamoto. He
saw phantom images of the crowds, of Otsū's white face in their midst. Of
Matahachi, always chewing food, of Uncle Gon, walking about importantly.
Vaguely he sensed the face of his mother, worried about his being out so late,
coming to look for him.
       The musicians, clad in unusual costumes intended to simulate the elegance
of the imperial guards of old, took their places on the stage. In the light of the
fire, their tawdry finery, glittering with patches of gold brocade, was suggestive
of the mythical robes of the age of the gods. The beating of the slightly slack
drumheads reverberated through the forest of cryptomeria, then the flutes and
well-seasoned boards, clapped rhythmically with small blocks, sounded the
prelude. The master of the dance came forward, wearing the mask of an ancient
man. This unearthly face, from whose cheeks and chin much of the lacquer had
peeled, moved slowly as he sang the words of Kamiasobi, the dance of the gods.


           On sacred Mount Mimuro
           With its godly fence,

           Before the great deity,
           The leaves of the sakaki tree
           Grow in profuse abundance,
           Grow in profuse abundance.


      The tempo of the drums picked up and other instruments joined in. Soon
song and dance melded in a lively, syncopated rhythm.


           Whence came this spear?
           It is the spear of the sacred dwelling
           Of the Princess Toyooka who is in Heaven—
           The spear of the sacred dwelling.


     Musashi knew some of the songs. As a child, he had sung them and
donned a mask and taken part in the dancing at Sanumo Shrine.


           The sword that protects the people,
           The people of all lands.
           Let's hang it festively before the deity,
           Hang it festively before the deity.


       The revelation struck like lightning. Musashi had been watching the hands
of one of the drummers, wielding two short, club-shaped drumsticks. He sucked
in his breath and fairly shouted, "That's it! Two swords!"
       Startled by the voice, Iori took his eyes away from the stage just long
enough to look down and say, "Oh, there you are."
       Musashi didn't even glance up. He stared straight ahead, not in dreamy
rapture like the others but with a look of almost frightening penetration.
       "Two swords," he repeated. "It's the same principle. Two drumsticks, but
only one sound." He folded his arms more tightly and scrutinized the drummer's
every movement.
       From one point of view, it was simplicity itself. People were born with two

hands; why not use both of them? As it was, swordsmen fought with only one
sword, and often one hand. This made sense, so long as everybody followed the
same practice. But if one combatant were to employ two swords at once, what
chance would an opponent using only one have of winning?
       Against the Yoshioka School at Ichijōji, Musashi had discovered his long
sword in his right hand, his short sword in his left. He had grasped both weapons
instinctively, unconsciously, each arm involved to the utmost in protecting him.
In a life-and-death struggle, he had reacted in an unorthodox fashion, Now, all of
a sudden, the rationale seemed natural, if not inevitable.
       If two armies were facing each other in battle, it would be unthinkable
under the rules of the Art of War for either to make use of one flank while
allowing the other to stand idle. Was there not a principle here that the lone
swordsman could not afford to ignore? Ever since Ichijōji, it had seemed to
Musashi that to use both hands and both swords was the normal, human way.
Only custom, followed unquestioningly over the centuries, had made it seem
abnormal. He felt he had arrived at an undeniable truth: custom had made the
unnatural appear natural, and vice versa.
       While custom was bred by daily experience, being on the boundary
between life and death was something that occurred only a few times during a
lifetime. Yet the ultimate aim of the Way of the Sword was to be able to stand on
the brink of death at any time: facing death squarely, unflinchingly, should be as
familiar as all other daily experiences. And the process had to be a conscious
one, though movement should be as free as if it were purely reflexive.
       The two-sword style had to be of this nature—conscious but at the same
time as automatic as a reflex, completely free of the restrictions inherent in
conscious action. Musashi had been trying for some time to unite in a valid
principle what he knew instinctively with what he had learned by intellectual
means. Now he was close to formulating it in words, and it would make him
famous throughout the country for generations to come.
       Two drumsticks, one sound. The drummer was conscious of left and right,
right and left, but at the same time unconscious of them. Here, before his eyes,
was the Buddhist sphere of free interpenetration. Musashi felt enlightened,
fulfilled.
       The five sacred dances, having begun with the song of the master of the
dance, continued with performances by the dancers. There was the broad,
sweeping Dance of Iwato, then the Dance of Ara Mikoto no Hoko. The melodies
of the flutes quickened; bells rang in lively rhythm.

      Musashi looked up at Iori and said, "Aren't you ready to leave?"
      "Not yet," came the absentminded reply. Iori's spirit had become part of
the dance; he felt himself to be one of the performers.
      "Come back before it gets too late. Tomorrow we're going to climb the
peak to the inner shrine."
