The Sound of Heaven


       "Back already?" asked Gonnosuke, blinking his eyes at the sight of
Musashi in stiffly starched formal dress.
       Musashi went inside the house and sat down. Gonnosuke knelt at the edge
of the reed matting and bowed. "Congratulations," he said warmly. "Will you
have to go to work right away?"
      "The appointment was canceled," Musashi said with a laugh.
      "Canceled? Are you joking?"
      "No. And I consider it a good thing, too."
      "I don't understand. Do you know what went wrong?"
      "I saw no reason to ask. I'm grateful to heaven for the way it turned out."
      "But it seems a pity."
      "Are even you of the opinion I can find glory only within the walls of Edo
      Castle?"
      Gonnosuke did not answer.
       "For a time, I had such an ambition. I dreamed of applying my
understanding of the sword to the problem of providing peace and happiness for
the people, making the Way of the Sword the Way of Government. I thought
being an official would give me a chance to test my idea."
       "Somebody slandered you. Is that it?"
       "Perhaps, but don't give it another thought. And don't misunderstand me.
My ideas, I've learned, particularly today, are little more than dreams."
       "That's not true. I've had the same idea; the Way of the Sword and the
spirit of good government ought to be one and the same."
       "I'm glad we agree. But in fact, the truth of the scholar, alone in his study,
does not always accord with what the world at large considers to be true."
       "Then you think the truth you and I are searching for is of no use in the
real world."
       "No, it's not that," said Musashi impatiently. "As long as this country
exists, no matter how things change, the brave man's Way of the Spirit will never
cease to be useful.... If you give the matter some thought, you'll see that the Way
of Government is not concerned with the Art of War alone. A flawless political
system must be based on a perfect blending of military and literary arts. To cause

the world to live in peace is the ultimate Way of the Sword. That's why I've
come to the conclusion that my thoughts are only dreams, childish dreams at
that. I must learn to be a humble servant of two gods, one of the sword, one of
the pen. Before I attempt to govern the nation, I must learn what the nation has
to teach." He concluded with a laugh but abruptly stopped and asked Gonnosuke
if he had an ink box or a writing kit.
       When he finished writing, he folded up his letter and said to Gonnosuke,
"I'm sorry to trouble you, but I'd like to ask you to deliver this for me."
       "To the Hōjō residence?"
       "Yes. I've written fully about my feelings. Give Takuan and Lord Ujikatsu
my warmest greetings.... Oh, there's one more thing. I've been keeping
something of Iori's. Please give it to him." He pulled out the pouch Iori's father
had left him and placed it beside the letter.
       With an anxious look on his face, Gonnosuke moved forward on his knees
and said, "Why are you returning this to Iori now?"
      "I'm going to the mountains."
      "Mountains or city, wherever you go, Iori and I want to be with you as your
      disciples."
      "I won't be away forever. While I am, I'd like you to take care of Iori, say
      for the next two or three years."
      "What? Are you going into retirement?"
       Musashi laughed, uncrossed his legs and leaned back on his arms. "I'm
much too young for that. I'm not giving up my great hope. Everything's still
ahead of me: desire, illusion, everything.... There's a song. I don't know who
wrote it, but it goes like this:


           While yearning to gain
           The depths of the mountains,
           I'm drawn against my will
           To the places
           Where people reside."


       Gonnosuke lowered his head as he listened. Then he stood up and put the
letter and pouch in his kimono. "I'd better go now," he said quietly. "It's getting
dark."

       "All right. Please return the horse, and tell Lord Ujikatsu that since the
clothes are soiled from travel, I'll keep them."
       "Yes, of course."
       "I don't think it would be discreet for me to go back to Lord Ujikatsu's
house. The cancellation of the appointment must mean that the shogunate
regards me as unreliable or suspicious. It might cause Lord Ujikatsu trouble to
be associated any more closely with me. I didn't write that in the letter, so I want
you to explain it to him. Tell him I hope he's not offended."
       "I understand. I'll be back before morning."
       The sun was rapidly setting. Gonnosuke took the horse's bit and led the
animal down the path. Since it had been lent to Musashi, the idea of riding it
never crossed his mind.
       It was about two hours later when he reached Ushigome. The men were
sitting around, wondering what had become of Musashi. Gonnosuke joined them
and gave the letter to Takuan.
       An official had already been there to inform them of unfavorable reports
on Musashi's character and past activities. Of all the points against him, the most
damaging was that he had an enemy who had sworn vengeance. According to
the rumors, Musashi was in the wrong.
       After the official left, Shinzō had told his father and Takuan about Osugi's
visit. "She even tried to sell her wares here," was the way he put it.
       What was left unexplained was why people accepted so unquestioningly
what they were told. Not just ordinary people—women gossiping around the
well or laborers drinking in cheap sake shops—but men who had the intelligence
to sift fact from fabrication. The shōgun's ministers had discussed the matter for
many long hours, but even they had ended up giving credence to Osugi's
calumnies.
       Takuan and the others half expected Musashi's letter to express his
discontent, but in fact it said little beyond giving his reason for going away. He
began by saying that he had asked Gonnosuke to tell them how he felt. Then
came the song he had sung for Gonnosuke. The short letter ended: "Indulging
my chronic wanderlust, I am setting out on another aimless journey. On this
occasion, I offer the following poem, which may amuse you:


           If the universe
           Is indeed my garden,

           When I look at it,
           I stand at the exit of
           The house called the Floating World."


        Though Ujikatsu and Shinzō were deeply touched by Musashi's
consideration, Ujikatsu said, "He's too self-effacing. I'd like to see him once
more before he goes away. Takuan, I doubt that he'd come if we sent for him, so
let's go to him." He got to his feet, ready to leave immediately.
        "Could you wait a moment, sir?" asked Gonnosuke. "I'd like to go with
you, but Musashi asked me to give something to Iori. Could you have him
brought here?"
        When Iori came in, he asked, "Did you want me?" His eyes went
immediately to the pouch in Gonnosuke's hand.
        "Musashi said you were to take good care of this," said Gonnosuke, "since
it's the only keepsake you have from your father." He then explained that the two
of them would be together until Musashi's return.
        Iori couldn't hide his disappointment, but not wanting to appear weak, he
nodded halfheartedly.
        In answer to Takuan's inquiries, Iori told all he knew about his parents.
When there were no more questions, he said, "One thing I've never known is
what became of my sister. My father didn't say much about her, and my mother
died without telling me anything I can remember. I don't know where she lives,
or whether she's alive or dead."
        Takuan placed the pouch on his knee and took out a crumpled piece of
paper. As he read the cryptic message Iori's father had written, his eyebrows shot
up in surprise. Staring hard at Iori, he said, "This tells us something about your
sister."
        "I thought maybe it did, but I didn't understand it and neither did the priest
at the Tokuganji."
        Skipping over the first part, Takuan read aloud: "'Since I had resolved to
die of starvation before serving a second lord, my wife and I wandered around
for many years, living in the humblest circumstances. One year we had to
abandon our daughter at a temple in the central provinces. We put 'one sound of
heaven' in her baby clothes and entrusted her future to the threshold of
compassion. Then we went on to another province.
        "'Later, I acquired my thatched house in the fields of Shimōsa. I thought

back to that earlier time, but the place was far away and we had had no word, so
I feared it might not be in the girl's interest to try to find her. I consequently left
matters as they were.
       "'How cruel parents can be! I am reproved by the words of Minamoto no
Sanetomo:


           Even the animals,
           Which cannot speak their feelings,
           Are not bereft of
           The tender generous love
           Of parents for their offspring.


       "'May my ancestors take pity on me for refusing to sully my honor as a
samurai by taking a second lord. You are my son. No matter how much you
crave success, do not eat dishonorable millet!"'
       As he placed the paper back in the pouch, Takuan said, "You'll be able to
see your sister. I've known her since I was a young man. Musashi knows her too.
Come with us, Iori." He gave no hint as to why he said this, nor did he mention
Otsū or the "sound of heaven," which he recognized to be her flute.
       They all left together and hurried to the cabin, arriving shortly after the
first rays of the rising sun touched it. It stood empty. On the edge of the plain
was one white cloud.
