Green Persimmons


       In the dog days after the summer rainy season, the land crabs crawled
sluggishly in the parched street, and the signs taunting Musashi to "come out and
fight" were no longer visible. The few that hadn't fallen in the rain-softened earth
or been stolen for firewood were obscured by weeds and tall grass.
       "There must be something somewhere," thought Kojirō, looking around
for a place to eat. But this was Edo, not Kyoto, and the cheap rice-and-tea shops
so common in the older city had not yet made their appearance here. The only
likely place stood in a vacant lot, screened off with reed blinds. Smoke rose
lazily from behind the blinds, and on a vertical banner was the word "Donjiki."
The word immediately reminded him of tonjiki, which in the distant past had
meant the rice balls used as military rations.
       As he approached, he heard a masculine voice ask for a cup of tea. Inside,
two samurai were energetically gobbling rice, one from an ordinary rice bowl,
the other from a sake bowl.
      Kojirō seated himself on the edge of a bench across from them and asked
      the proprietor, "What do you have?"
      "Rice dishes. I also have sake."
      "On the banner it says 'Donjiki.' What does that mean?"
      "As a matter of fact, I don't know."
      "Didn't you write it?"
      "No. It was written by a retired merchant who stopped in to rest." "I see.
      Good calligraphy, I must say."
       "He said he was on a religious pilgrimage, said he'd visited Hirakawa
Tenjin Shrine, Hikawa Shrine, Kanda Myōjin, all sorts of places, making big
contributions to each of them. Very pious and generous, he seemed."
      "Do you know his name?"
      "He told me it was Daizō of Narai."
      "I've heard the name."
       "Donjiki—well, I don't understand it. But I figured if a fine man like him
wrote it, it might help keep the god of poverty away." He laughed.
       After a look into several large china bowls, Kojirō took some rice and fish,
poured tea over the rice, brushed a fly away with his chopsticks and began

eating.
       One of the other customers stood up and peered through a broken slat in
the blind. "Take a look out there, Hamada," he said to his companion. "Isn't that
the watermelon vendor?"
       The other man went quickly to the blind and looked out. "Yeah, that's him
all right."
       The vendor, shouldering a pole with baskets at either end, was walking
languidly past the Donjiki. The two samurai ran out of the shop and caught up
with him. Drawing their swords, they cut the ropes supporting the baskets. The
vendor stumbled forward, along with the melons.
      Hamada yanked him up by the scruff of his neck. "Where did you take
      her?" he demanded angrily. "Don't lie. You must be hiding her somewhere."
      The other samurai thrust the tip of his sword under the captive's nose. "Out
      with it! Where is she?"
       The sword blade tapped menacingly against the man's cheek. "How could
anybody with a face like yours think of going off with somebody else's woman?"
       The vendor, cheeks flushed with anger and fear, shook his head, but then,
seeing an opening, shoved one of his captors out of the way, picked up his pole
and took a swing at the other one.
       "So you want to fight, do you? Careful, Hamada, this guy's not just an
ordinary melon vendor."
       "What can this ass do?" sneered Hamada, snatching the pole and knocking
the vendor to the ground. Straddling him, he used the ropes to tie him to the
pole.
       A cry like that of a stuck pig went up behind him. Hamada turned his face
around, right into a spray of fine red mist. Looking totally dumbfounded, he
jumped up, screaming, "Who are you? What—"
       The adderlike blade moved directly toward him. Kojirō laughed, and as
Hamada shrank back, followed him relentlessly. The two moved in a circle
through the grass. When Hamada moved back a foot, Kojirō moved forward the
same distance. When Hamada leapt to one side, the Drying Pole followed,
pointing unwaveringly at its prospective victim.
       The melon vendor cried out in astonishment, "Kojirō! It's me. Save me!"
Hamada blanched with terror and gasped, "Ko-ji-rō!" Then he wheeled around
and tried to flee.
       "Where do you think you're going?" barked Kojirō. The Drying Pole
flashed through the sultry stillness, lopping off Hamada's ear and lodging deep in

the flesh under the shoulders. He died on the spot.
       Kojirō promptly cut the melon vendor's bonds. Rearranging himself into a
proper sitting posture, the man bowed, and stayed bowed, too embarrassed to
show his face.
       Kojirō wiped and resheathed his sword. Amusement playing faintly around
his lips, he said, "What's the matter with you, Matahachi? Don't look so
miserable. You're still alive."
      "Yes, sir."
      "None of this 'yes, sir' business. Look at me. It's been a long time, hasn't it?"
      "I'm glad you're well."
      "Why wouldn't I be? But I must say you've taken to an unusual trade."
      "Let's not talk about it."
       "All right. Pick up your melons. Then—I know, why don't you leave them
at the Donjiki?" With a loud shout, he summoned the proprietor, who helped
them stack the melons behind the blinds.
       Kojirō took out his brush and ink and wrote on one of the shoji: "To whom
it may concern: I certify that the person who killed the two men lying on this
vacant lot was myself, Sasaki Kojirō, a rōnin residing at Tsukinomisaki."
       To the proprietor, he said, "This should fix it so no one'll bother you about
the killings."
       "Thank you, sir."
       "Think nothing of it. If friends or relatives of the dead men should come
around, please deliver this message for me. Tell them I won't run away. If they
want to see me, I'm ready to greet them anytime."
       Outside again, he said to Matahachi, "Let's go."
       Matahachi walked beside him but would not take his eyes off the ground.
Not once since coming to Edo had he held a steady job. Whatever his intention
—to become a shugyōsha or to go into business—when he found the going
rough, he changed jobs. And after Otsū slipped away from him, he felt less and
less like working. He'd slept in first one place, then another, sometimes at
flophouses populated by hoodlums. The past few weeks, he had been making his
living as a common peddler, trudging from one part of the castle wall to another,
hawking watermelons.
       Kojirō wasn't particularly interested in what Matahachi had been doing,
but he had written the sign at the Donjiki and he might later be questioned about
the incident. "Why did those samurai have it in for you?" he asked.
       "To tell the truth, it had to do with a woman...."

       Kojirō smiled, thinking wherever Matahachi went, there soon arose some
difficulty connected with women. Perhaps this was his karma. "Mm," he IT
ambled. "The great lover in action again, eh?" Then, more loudly, "Who is the
woman, and what exactly happened?"
       It took some prodding, but eventually Matahachi gave in and told his tale,
or part of it. Near the moat, there were dozens of tiny tea shops catering to
construction workers and passersby. In one of these there had been a waitress
who caught everybody's eyes, enticing men who did not want tea to step in for a
cup and men who were not hungry to order bowls of sweet jelly. One regular
customer had been Hamada; Matahachi, too, dropped in occasionally.
       One day this waitress whispered to him that she needed his help. "That
rōnin," she had said. "I don't like him, but every night after the shop closes, the
master orders me to go home with him. Won't you let me come and hide in your
house? I won't be a burden. I'll cook for you, and mend your clothes."
      Since her plea seemed reasonable, Matahachi had agreed. That was all there
      was to it, he insisted.
      Kojirō was unconvinced. "It sounds fishy to me."
      "Why?" Matahachi asked.
       Kojirō could not decide whether Matahachi was trying to make himself
appear innocent or whether he was bragging about an amorous conquest.
Without even smiling, he said, "Never mind. It's hot out here under the sun. Let's
go to your house, and you can tell me about it in more detail."
      Matahachi stopped in his tracks.
      "Is there anything wrong with that?" asked Kojirō.
      "Well, my place is—it's not the sort of place I'd want to take you to."
       Seeing the distressed look in Matahachi's eyes, Kojirō said lightly, "Never
mind. But one of these days soon you must come to see me. I'm staying with
Iwama Kakubei, about halfway up Isarago Hill."
      "I'd like that."
      "By the way, did you see the signs posted around the city recently, the ones
      addressed to Musashi?"
      "Yes."
      "They said your mother was looking for him too. Why don't you go to see
      her?"
      "Not the way I am now!"
       "Idiot. You don't have to put on a great show for your own mother. There's
no way of knowing just when she might find Musashi, and if you're not there at

the time, you'll lose the chance of a lifetime. You'd regret that, wouldn't you?"
       "Yes, I'll have to do something about that soon," Matahachi said
noncommittally, thinking resentfully that other people, including the man who
had just saved his life, did not understand the feelings between mothers and their
offspring.
       They parted, Matahachi ambling down a grassy lane, Kojirō ostensibly
setting out in the opposite direction. Kojirō soon doubled back and followed
Matahachi, taking care to stay out of sight.
       Matahachi arrived presently at a motley collection of "long houses," one-
story tenements, each containing three or four small apartments under a single
roof. Since Edo had grown rapidly and not everybody could be choosy about
where he lived, people cleared land as the necessity arose. Streets came into
existence afterward, developing naturally from pathways. Drainage, too, came
about by accident, as waste water cut its own path to the nearest stream. Had it
not been for these jerry-built slums, the influx of newcomers could not have
been absorbed. The majority of the inhabitants of such places were, of course,
workmen.
       Near his home, Matahachi was greeted by a neighbor named Umpei, the
boss of a crew of well diggers. Umpei was seated cross-legged in a large wooden
tub, only his face showing above the rain shutter placed sideways in front of the
tub for privacy.
      "Good evening," said Matahachi. "I see you're having your bath."
      "I'm about to get out," replied the boss genially. "Would you like to use it
      next?"
      "Thanks, but I think Akemi's probably heated water for me."
       "You two are very fond of each other, aren't you? Nobody around here
seems to know whether you're brother and sister or husband and wife. Which is
it?"
       Matahachi giggled sheepishly. The appearance of Akemi saved him from
having to answer.
       She placed a tub under a persimmon tree and brought pailfuls of hot water
from the house to fill it. When she was done, she said, "Feel it, Matahachi. See if
it's hot enough."
       "It's a little too hot."
       There was the squeaking of the well pulley, and Matahachi, stripped to his
loincloth, brought up a bucket of cold water and poured it into the bath before
climbing in himself. "Ah-h-h," he sighed contentedly. "This feels good."

       Umpei, wearing a cotton summer kimono, placed a bamboo stool under a
gourd trellis and sat down. "Did you sell lots of melons?" he inquired.
       "Not many. I never sell very many." Noticing dried blood between his
fingers, he hastily wiped it off.
       "I don't imagine you would. I still think your life would be easier if you
went to work on a well-digging gang."
       "You're always saying that. Don't think I'm ungrateful, but if I did that,
they wouldn't let me off the castle grounds, would they? That's why Akemi
doesn't want me to take the job. She says she'd be lonesome without me."
      "Happily married couple, eh? Well, well."
      "Ouch!"
      "What's the matter?"
      "Something fell on my head."
      A green persimmon landed on the ground just behind Matahachi.
       "Ha, ha! Punishment for bragging about your wife's devotion, that's what it
is." Still laughing, Umpei rapped his tannin-coated fan on his knee.
       Over sixty years old, with a shaggy, hemplike mane of white hair, Umpei
was a man who enjoyed the respect of his neighbors and the admiration of the
young people, whom he bigheartedly treated as his own children. Each morning
he could be heard chanting Namu Myōhō Rengekyō, the sacred invocation of the
Nichiren sect.
       A native of Itō in Izu Province, he had a sign in front of his house saying:
"Idohori no Umpei, Well Digger for the Shōgun's Castle." To build the many
wells necessary for the castle involved technical skills beyond those of ordinary
laborers. Umpei had been hired as a consultant and recruiter of workers because
of his long experience in the gold mines of Izu Peninsula. He enjoyed nothing
more than sitting under his beloved gourd trellis, spinning yarns and drinking his
nightly cup of cheap but potent shōchū, the poor man's sake.
       After Matahachi emerged from the bath, Akemi surrounded the washtub
with rain shutters and had hers. Later, the matter of Umpei's proposal came up
once again. Besides having to stay on the castle grounds, the workers were
watched very closely, and their families were virtually hostages of the bosses of
the areas where they lived. On the other hand, the work was easier than on the
outside and paid at least twice as much.
       Leaning over a tray on which there was a dish of cold bean curd, garnished
with fresh, fragrant basil leaf, Matahachi said, "I don't want to become a prisoner
just to earn a little money. I'm not going to sell melons all my life, but bear with

me a little longer, Akemi."
      "Umm," she replied between mouthfuls of tea-and-rice gruel. "I'd rather
you tried just once to do something really worthwhile, something that would
make people take notice."
      Though nothing was ever said or done to discourage the idea that she was
Matahachi's legal wife, she wasn't about to marry anyone who shilly-shallied the
way he did. Fleeing the world of play at Sakaimachi with Matahachi had been
only an expedient; he was the perch from which she intended, at the first
opportunity, to fly once more into the open sky. But it did not suit her purposes
for Matahachi to go off to the castle to work. She felt being left alone would be
dangerous; specifically, she was afraid Hamada might find her and force her to
live with him.
      "Oh, I forgot," said Matahachi, as they finished their frugal meal. He then
told her about his experiences that day, adjusting the details in a fashion
calculated to please her. By the time he had finished, her face was ashen.
      Taking a deep breath, she said, "You saw Kojirō? Did you tell him I was
here? You didn't, did you?"
      Matahachi took her hand and placed it on his knee. "Of course not. Do you
think I'd let that bastard know where you are? He's the kind that never gives up.
He'd be after you—"
      He broke off with an inarticulate shout and pressed his hand to the side of
his face. The green persimmon that smashed against his cheek broke and
spattered its whitish meat in Akemi's face.
      Outside, in the shadows of a moonlit bamboo grove, a form not unlike that
of Kojirō could be seen walking nonchalantly away in the direction of town.
