A Chat with the Men


       Before having breakfast, Lord Hosokawa Tadatoshi began his day with the
study of the Confucian classics. Official duties, which often required his
attendance at Edo Castle, consumed most of his time, but when he could fit it
into his schedule, he practiced the martial arts. Evenings, whenever possible, he
liked to spend in the company of the young samurai in his service.
       The atmosphere was rather like that of a harmonious family seated around
its patriarch, not completely informal, to be sure, for the idea that his lordship
was just one of the boys was not encouraged, but the usually rigorous etiquette
was relaxed a bit. Tadatoshi, lounging in a lightweight hemp kimono,
encouraged an exchange of views, which often included the latest gossip.
      "Okatani," said his lordship, singling out one of the more robust men.
      "Yes, sir."
      "I hear you're pretty good with the lance now."
      "That's right. Very good, in fact."
      "Ha, ha. You certainly don't suffer from false modesty."
      "Well, sir, with everybody else saying so, why should I deny it?"
      "One of these days I'll find out for myself how advanced your technique
      really is."
      "I've been looking forward to that day, but it never seems to come." "You're
      lucky it doesn't."
      "Tell me, sir, have you heard the song everybody's singing?"
      "What's that?"
      "It goes like this:


           There're lancers and lancers,
           All sorts of lancers,
           But the greatest one of all is
           Okatani Gorōji—"


     Tadatoshi laughed. "You can't take me in that easily. That song's about

      Nagoya Sanzō."
      The others joined in the laughter.
      "Oh, you knew?"
        "You'd be surprised at what I know." He was on the verge of giving further
evidence of this but thought better of it. He enjoyed hearing what his men were
thinking and talking about and considered it his duty to keep himself well
informed, but it would hardly do to reveal just how much he actually knew.
Instead he asked, "How many of you are specializing in the lance, how many in
the sword?"
        Out of seven, five were studying the lance, only two the sword. "Why do
so many of you prefer the lance?" asked Tadatoshi.
      The consensus among the lancers was that it was more effective in battle.
      "And what do the swordsmen think about that?"
      One of the two replied, "The sword is better. Swordsmanship prepares you
      for peace as well as for war."
      This was a perennial subject for discussion and the debate was usually
      lively.
        One of the lancers asserted, "The longer the lance is, the better, provided
it's not too long to handle efficiently. The lance can be used for striking,
thrusting or slicing, and if you fail with it, you can always fall back on your
sword. If you have only a sword and it gets broken, that's it."
        "That may be true," rejoined an exponent of sword fighting, "but a
samurai's work isn't limited to the battlefield. The sword is his soul. To practice
its art is to refine and discipline your spirit. In the broadest sense, the sword is
the basis for all military training, whatever drawbacks it may have in battle. If
you master the inner meaning of the Way of the Samurai, the discipline can be
applied to the use of the lance, or even guns. If you know the sword, you don't
make silly mistakes or get taken unawares. Swordsmanship is an art with
universal applications."
        The argument might have gone on indefinitely, had not Tadatoshi, who had
been listening without taking sides, said, "Mainosuke, what you just said sounds
to me like something you heard somebody else say."
        Matsushita Mainosuke grew defensive. "No, sir. That's my own opinion."
"Come now, be honest."
        "Well, to tell the truth, I heard something similar when I was visiting
Kakubei recently. Sasaki Kojirō said about the same thing. But it fitted in so well
with my own idea ... I wasn't trying to deceive anyone. Sasaki just put it into

words better than I could."
       "I thought as much," said Tadatoshi with a knowing smile. The mention of
Kojirō's name reminded him that he had not yet made a decision as to whether to
accept Kakubei's recommendation.
       Kakubei had suggested that since Kojirō was not very old, he might be
offered a thousand bushels or so. But much more than the matter of the stipend
was involved. Tadatoshi had been told by his father many times that it was of
prime importance to first exercise good judgment in hiring samurai and then to
treat them well. Before accepting a candidate, it was imperative to assess not
only his skills but also his character. No matter how desirable a man might seem
to be, if he could not work together with the retainers who had made the House
of Hosokawa what it was today, he would be virtually useless.
       A fief, the elder Hosokawa had advised, was like a castle wall built of
many rocks. A rock that could not be cut to fit in comfortably with the others
would weaken the whole structure, even though the rock itself might be of
admirable size and quality. The daimyō of the new age left the unsuitable rocks
in the mountains and fields, for there was an abundance of them. The great
challenge was to find one great rock that would make an outstanding
contribution to one's own wall. Thought of in this way, Tadatoshi felt, Kojirō's
youth was in his favor. He was still in his formative years and consequently
susceptible to a certain amount of molding.
       Tadatoshi was also reminded of the other rōnin. Nagaoka Sado had first
mentioned Musashi at one of these evening get-togethers. Though Sado had
allowed Musashi to slip through his fingers, Tadatoshi had not forgotten him. If
Sado's information was accurate, Musashi was both a better fighter than Kojirō
and a man of sufficient breadth to be valuable in government.
       As he compared the two, he had to admit that most daimyō would prefer
Kojirō. He came from a good family and had studied the Art of War thoroughly.
Despite his youth, he had developed a formidable style of his own, and he had
gained considerable fame as a fighter. The story of his "brilliant" defeat of men
from the Obata Academy on the banks of the Sumida River and again at the dike
on the Kanda River was already well known.
       Nothing had been heard of Musashi for some time. His victory at Ichijōji
had made his reputation. But that had been years ago, and soon afterward word
had spread that the story was exaggerated, that Musashi was a seeker after fame
who had trumped up the fight, made a flashy attack and then fled to Mount Hiei.
Every time Musashi did something praiseworthy, a spate of rumors followed,

denigrating his character and ability. It had reached the point where even the
mention of his name usually met with critical remarks. Or else people ignored
him entirely. As the son of a nameless warrior in the mountains of Mimasaka, his
lineage was insignificant. Though other men of humble origin—most notably
Toyotomi Hideyoshi, who came from Nakamura in Owari Province—had risen
to glory in recent memory, people were on the whole class-conscious and not
given to paying much heed to a man of Musashi's background.
      As Tadatoshi mulled over the question, he looked around and asked, "Do
any of you know of a samurai named Miyamoto Musashi?"
      "Musashi?" replied a surprised voice "It'd be impossible not to hear of him.
His name's all over town." It was evident that they were all familiar with the
name.
      "Why is that?" A look of anticipation came over Tadatoshi's face.
      "There are signs up about him," offered one young man, with a slight air of
reticence.
      Another man, whose name was Mori, chimed in, "People were copying the
signs, so I did too. I've got it with me now. Shall I read it?"
      "Please do."
      "Ah, here it is," said Mori, unfolding a crumpled scrap of paper. " 'Here's a
word to Miyamoto Musashi, who turned tail and ran—' "
      Eyebrows were raised and smiles began to appear, but Tadatoshi's face was
grave. "Is that all?"
      "No." He read the rest of it and said, "The signs were put up by a gang
from the carpenters' district. People find it amusing because it's a case of street
ruffians tweaking the nose of a samurai."
      Tadatoshi frowned slightly, feeling that the words maligning Musashi
called his own judgment into question. This was a far cry from the image he had
formed of Musashi. Still, he was not ready to accept what he had heard at face
value. "Hmm," he murmured. "I wonder if Musashi is really that sort of man."
      "I gather he's a worthless lout," volunteered Mori, whose opinion was
shared by the others. "Or at least a coward. If he wasn't, why would he allow his
name to be dragged through the mud?"
      The clock struck, and the men departed, but Tadatoshi sat on, thinking:
"There's something interesting about this man." Not one to be swayed by the
prevailing opinion, he was curious to know Musashi's side of the story.
      The next morning, after listening to a lecture on the Chinese classics, he
emerged from his study onto the veranda and caught sight of Sado in the garden.

"Good morning, my elderly friend," he called.
     Sado turned and politely bowed his morning greeting.
     "Are you still on the lookout?" asked Tadatoshi.
     Puzzled by the question, Sado merely stared back.
     "I mean, are you still keeping an eye out for Miyamoto Musashi?" "Yes, my
     lord." Sado lowered his eyes.
     "If you do find him, bring him here. I want to see what he's like."
     Shortly after noon on the same day, Kakubei approached Tadatoshi at the
     archery range and pressed his recommendation of Kojirō.
      As he picked up his bow, the Young Lord said quietly, "Sorry, I'd
forgotten. Bring him any time you wish. I'd like to have a look at him. Whether
he becomes a retainer or not is another matter, as you well know."
