The Eagle


       Kakubei regretted having allowed himself to be used shabbily and vowed
to have nothing more to do with Kojirō. Yet deep down, he liked the man. What
he didn't like was being caught between his master and his protégé. Then he
began to rethink the matter.
       "Maybe Kojirō's reaction proves how exceptional he is. The ordinary
samurai would have jumped at the chance to be interviewed." The more he
reflected on Kojirō's fit of pique, the more the rōnin's independent spirit
appealed to him.
       For the next three days Kakubei was on night duty. He did not see Kojirō
until the morning of the fourth day, when he walked casually over to the young
man's quarters.
       After a short but awkward silence, he said, "I want to talk to you for a
minute, Kojirō. Yesterday, when I was leaving, Lord Tadatoshi asked me about
you. He said he'd see you. Why don't you drop in at the archery range and have a
look at the Hosokawa technique?"
       When Kojirō grinned without replying, Kakubei added, "I don't know why
you insist on thinking it's demeaning. It's usual to interview a man before
offering him an official position."
       "I know, but supposing he rejects me, then what? I'd be a castoff, wouldn't
I? I'm not so hard up that I have to go around peddling myself to the highest
bidder."
      "Then the fault is mine. I put it the wrong way. His lordship never meant to
      imply any such thing."
      "Well, what answer did you give him?"
      "None yet. But he seems a little impatient."
      "Ha, ha. You've been very thoughtful, very helpful. I suppose I shouldn't put
      you in such a difficult position."
      "Wouldn't you reconsider—go and call on him, just once?"
      "All right, if it means so much to you," Kojirō said patronizingly, but
      Kakubei was nonetheless pleased.
      "How about today?"
      "So soon?"

      "Yes."
      "What time?"
      "How about a little after noon? That's when he practices archery." "All
      right, I'll be there."
       Kojir/div set about making elaborate preparations for the meeting. The
kimono he chose was of excellent quality, and the hakama was made of imported
fabric. Over the kimono he wore a formal vestlike garment of sheer silk,
sleeveless but with stiff flaring shoulders. To complement his finery, he had the
servants provide him with new zōri and a new basket hat.
       "Is there a horse I can use?" he inquired.
       "Yes. The master's spare horse, the white one, is at the shop at the bottom
of the hill."
       Failing to find the florist, Kojirō glanced toward the temple compound
across the way, where a group of people was gathering around a corpse covered
with reed matting. He went over to have a look.
       They were discussing plans for burial with the local priest. The victim had
no identifying possessions on him; no one knew who he was, only that he was
young and of the samurai class. The blood around the deep gash extending from
the tip of one shoulder to his waist was dried and black.
       "I've seen him before. About four days ago, in the evening," said the
florist, -who went on talking excitedly until he felt a hand on his shoulder.
       When he looked to see who it was, Kojirō said, "I'm told Kakubei's horse
is kept at your place. Get him ready for me, please."
      Bowing hastily, the florist asked perfunctorily, "Are you going out?" and
      hurried off.
      He patted the dappled-gray steed on the neck as he led it out of his stable.
      "Quite a good horse," Kojirō remarked.
      "Yes, indeed. A fine animal."
      Once Kojirō was in the saddle, the florist beamed and said, "It's a good
      match."
      Taking some money from his purse, Kojirō threw it to the man. "Use this
      for flowers and incense."
      "Huh? Who for?"
      "The dead man over there."
       Beyond the temple gate, Kojirō cleared his throat and spat, as if to eject the
bitter taste left by the sight of the corpse. But he was pursued by the feeling that
the youth he had cut down with the Drying Pole had thrown aside the reed

matting and was following him. "I did nothing he could hate me for," he told
himself, and felt better for the thought.
       As horse and rider moved along the Takanawa highroad under the boiling
sun, townsmen and samurai alike stood aside to make way. Heads turned in
admiration. Even on the streets of Edo, Kojirō cut an impressive figure, causing
people to wonder who he was and where he came from.
       At the Hosokawa residence, he turned the horse over to a servant and
entered the house. Kakubei rushed to meet him. "My thanks for coming. It's just
the right time too," he said, as though Kojirō were doing him a great personal
favor. "Rest awhile. I'll tell his lordship you're here." Before doing so, he made
sure the guest was provided with cool water, barley tea and a tobacco tray.
       When a retainer came to show him to the archery range, Kojirō handed
over his beloved Drying Pole and followed along wearing only his short sword.
       Lord Tadatoshi had resolved to shoot a hundred arrows a day during the
       summer months. A number of close retainers were always there, watching
       each shot with bated breath and making themselves useful retrieving
arrows. "Give me a towel," his lordship commanded, standing his bow beside
him. Kneeling, Kakubei asked, "May I trouble you, sir?"
      "What is it?"
      "Sasaki Kojirō is here. I would appreciate your seeing him."
      "Sasaki? Oh, yes."
       He fitted an arrow to the bowstring, took an open stance, and raised his
shooting arm above his eyebrows. Neither he nor any of the others so much as
glanced in Kojirō's direction until the hundred shots were finished.
       With a sigh Tadatoshi said, "Water. Bring me some water."
       An attendant brought some from the well and poured it into a large
wooden tub at Tadatoshi's feet. Letting the upper part of his kimono hang loose,
he wiped off his chest and washed his feet. His men assisted by holding his
sleeves, running to fetch more water and wiping off his back. There was nothing
formal in their manner, nothing to suggest to an observer that this was a daimyō
and his retinue.
       Kojirō had supposed that Tadatoshi, a poet and an aesthete, the son of Lord
Sansai and the grandson of Lord Yūsai, would be a man of aristocratic bearing,
as refined in his conduct as the elegant courtiers of Kyoto. But his surprise did
not show in his eyes as he watched.
       Slipping his still damp feet into his zōri, Tadatoshi looked at Kakubei, who
was waiting off to one side. With the air of one has suddenly recalled a promise,

he said, "Now, Kakubei, I'll see your man." He had a stool brought and placed in
the shade of a tent, where he sat down in front of a banner bearing his crest, a
circle surrounded by eight smaller circles, representing the sun, moon and seven
planets.
       Beckoned by Kakubei, Kojirō came forward and knelt before Lord
Tadatoshi. As soon as the formal greeting was completed, Tadatoshi invited
Kojirō to sit on a stool, thus signifying that he was an honored guest.
       "By your leave," said Kojirō, as he rose and took a seat facing Tadatoshi.
"I've heard about you from Kakubei. I believe you were born in Iwakuni, weren't
you?"
       "That is correct, sir."
       "Lord Kikkawa Hiroie of Iwakuni was well known as a wise and noble
ruler. Were your ancestors retainers of his?"
       "No, we never served the House of Kikkawa. I've been told we're
descended from the Sasakis of Ōmi Province. After the fall of the last Ashikaga
shōgun, my father seems to have retired to my mother's village."
       After a few more questions concerning family and lineage, Lord Tadatoshi
asked, "Will you be going into service for the first time?"
      "I do not yet know whether I am going into service."
      "I gathered from Kakubei you wish to serve the House of Hosokawa. What
      are your reasons?"
      "I believe it is a house I would be willing to live and die for."
      Tadatoshi seemed pleased with this answer. "And your style of fighting?"
      "I call it the Ganryū Style."
      "'Ganryū'?"
      "It's a style I invented myself."
      "Presumably it has antecedents."
       "I studied the Tomita Style, and I had the benefit of lessons from Lord
Katayama Hisayasu of Hōki, who in his old age retired to Iwakuni. I've also
mastered many techniques on my own. I used to practice cutting down swallows
on the wing."
       "I see. I suppose the name Ganryū comes from the name of that river near
where you were born?"
       "Yes, sir."
       "I'd like to see a demonstration." Tadatoshi looked around at the faces of
his samurai. "Which one of you would like to take this man on?"
       They had been watching the interview in silence, thinking that Kojirō was

remarkably young to have acquired the reputation he had. Now all looked first at
each other, then at Kojirō, whose flushed cheeks proclaimed his willingness to
face any challenger.
     "How about you, Okatani?"
     "Yes, sir."
     "You're always claiming the lance is superior to the sword. Now's your
     chance to prove it."
     "I shall be glad to, if Sasaki is willing."
      "By all means," Kojirō answered with alacrity. In his tone, which was
polite but extremely cool, there was a hint of cruelty.
      The samurai who had been sweeping the sand on the archery range and
putting away the equipment assembled behind their master. Although weapons
were as familiar to them as chopsticks, their experience had been primarily in the
dōjō. The chance to witness, much less have, a real bout would occur only a few
times throughout their lives. They would readily agree that a man-to-man fight
was a greater challenge than going out on the battlefield, where it was sometimes
possible for a man to pause and get his wind while his comrades fought on. In
hand-to-hand combat, he had only himself to rely on, only his own alertness and
strength from beginning to end. Either he won, or he was killed or maimed.
      They watched Okatani Gorōji solemnly. Even among the lowest-ranking
foot soldiers there were quite a few who were adept with the lance; Gorōji was
generally conceded to be the best. He had not only been in battle but had
practiced diligently and devised techniques of his own.
      "Give me a few minutes," said Gorōji, bowing toward Tadatoshi and
Kojirō before withdrawing to make his preparations. It pleased him that today, as
on other days, he had on spotless underwear, in the tradition of the good samurai,
who started each day with a smile and an uncertainty: by evening he might be a
corpse.
      After borrowing a three-foot wooden sword, Kojirō selected the ground for
the match. His body seemed relaxed and open, the more so since he didn't hitch
up his pleated hakama. His appearance was formidable; even his enemies would
have had to admit that. There was an eaglelike air of valor about him, and his
handsome profile was serenely confident.
      Worried eyes began to turn toward the canopy behind which Gorōji was
adjusting his clothing and equipment.
      "What's taking him so long?" someone asked.
      Gorōji was calmly wrapping a piece of damp cloth around the point of his

lance, a weapon he had used to excellent effect on the battlefield. The shaft was
nine feet long, and the tapering blade alone, at eight or nine inches, was the
equivalent of a short sword.
       "What are you doing?" called Kojirō. "If you're worried about hurting me,
save yourself the trouble." Again, though the words were courteous, the
implication was arrogant. "I don't mind if you leave it unwrapped." Looking
sharply at him, Gorōji said, "Are you sure?"
       "Perfectly."
       Though neither Lord Tadatoshi nor his men spoke, their piercing eyes told
Gorōji to go ahead. If the stranger had the gall to ask for it, why not run him
through?
       "In that case ..." Gorōji tore off the wrapping and advanced holding the
lance midway along the shaft. "I'm happy to comply, but if I use a naked blade, I
want you to use a real sword."
       "This wooden one's fine."
       "No; I can't agree to that."
       "Certainly you wouldn't expect me, an outsider, to have the audacity to
employ a real sword in the presence of his lordship."
       "But—"
       With a touch of impatience, Lord Tadatoshi said, "Go ahead, Okatani.
Nobody will consider you cowardly for complying with the man's request." It
was obvious Kojirō's attitude had affected him.
       The two men, faces flushed with determination, exchanged greetings with
their eyes. Gorōji made the first move, leaping to the side, but Kojirō, like a bird
stuck to a limed fowling pole, slipped under the lance and struck directly at his
chest. Lacking time to thrust, the lancer whirled sideways and tried to jab the
nape of Kojirō's neck with the butt of his weapon. With a resounding crack, the
lance flew back up into the air, as Kojirō's sword bit into Gorōji's ribs, which had
been exposed by the momentum of the rising lance. Gorōji slid to one side, then
leapt away, but the attack continued without letup. With no time to catch his
breath, he jumped aside again, then again and again. The first few dodges were
successful, but he was like a peregrine falcon trying to fend off an eagle.
Hounded by the raging sword, the lance shaft snapped in two. At the same
instant, Gorōji emitted a cry; it sounded as though his soul was being torn from
his body.
       The brief battle was ended. Kojirō had hoped to take on four or five men,
but Tadatoshi said that he had seen enough.

        When Kakubei came home that evening, Kojirō asked him, "Did I go a
little too far? In front of his lordship, I mean."
        "No, it was a magnificent performance." Kakubei felt rather ill at ease.
Now that he could assess the full extent of Kojirō's ability, he felt like a man
who had hugged a tiny bird to his chest, only to see it grow up to be an eagle.
       "Did Lord Tadatoshi say anything?"
       "Nothing in particular."
       "Come now, he must have said something."
       "No; he left the archery range without a word."
        "Hmm." Kojirō looked disappointed but said, "Oh, it doesn't matter. He
impressed me as a greater man than he's usually made out to be. I was thinking if
I had to serve anyone, it might as well be him. But of course I have no control
over how things turn out." He didn't reveal how carefully he had thought about
the situation. After the Date, Kuroda, Shimazu and Mōri clans, the Hosokawa
was the most prestigious and secure. He felt sure this would continue to be true
so long as Lord Sansai held the Buzen fief. And sooner or later, Edo and Osaka
would clash once and for all. There was no way of predicting the outcome; a
samurai who had chosen the wrong master might easily find himself a rōnin
again, his whole life sacrificed for a few months' stipend.
        The day after the bout, word came that Gorōji had survive& though his
pelvis or left thighbone had been smashed. Kojirō accepted the news calmly,
telling himself that even if he did not receive a position, he had given a good
enough account of himself.
        A few days later he abruptly announced he was going to pay a call on
Gorōji. Offering no explanation for this sudden display of kindness, he set out
alone and on foot for Gorōji's house near Tokiwa Bridge.
        The unexpected visitor was received cordially by the injured man.
        "A match is a match," said Gorōji, a smile on his lips and moistness in his
eyes. "I may deplore my own lack of skill, but I certainly hold nothing against
you. It was good of you to come to see me. Thank you."
        After Kojirō left, Gorōji remarked to a friend, "Now, there's a samurai I
can admire. I thought he was an arrogant son of a bitch, but he turns out to be
both friendly and polite."
        This was precisely the reaction Kojirō had hoped for. It was part of his
plan; other visitors would hear him praised by the defeated man himself. Calling
once every two or three days, he made three more visits to Gorōji's house. On
one occasion he had a live fish delivered from the fish market as a get-well

present.
