Tadaaki’s Madness


      Osugi was not one to be driven to despair by the sorrows and bitter
disappointments of unrequited maternal devotion, but here, with the insects
singing amid the lespedeza and eulalia plants, with the great river flowing slowly
by, she was not unmoved by feelings of nostalgia and the impermanence of life.
     "Are you home?" The rough voice sounded harsh in the still evening air.
     "Who is it?" she called.
     "I'm from Hangawara's. A lot of fresh vegetables came in from Katsushika.
     The boss told me to bring you some."
     "Yajibei's always so thoughtful."
      She was seated at a low table, candle beside her and writing brush in hand,
copying the Sutra on the Great Love of Parents. She had moved into a small
rented house in the sparsely populated district of Hamachō and was making a
reasonably comfortable living treating other people's aches and pains with moxa.
She had no physical complaints to speak of. Since the beginning of autumn, she
had felt quite young again.
      "Say, Granny, did a young man come to see you earlier this evening?" "For
a moxa treatment, you mean?"
      "Unh-unh. He came to Yajibei's, seemed to have something important on
his mind. He asked where you were living now, and we told him."
     "How old was he?"
     "Twenty-seven or -eight, I guess."
     "What did he look like?"
     "Sort of round-faced. Not very tall."
     "Mm, I wonder...."
     "He had an accent like yours. I thought maybe he came from the same
     place. Well, I'll be going. Good night."
      As the footsteps faded, the voices of the insects rose again like the sound
of drizzling rain. Putting down her brush, Osugi gazed at the candle, thinking of
the days when she was young and people had read portents in the halo of the
candlelight. Those left behind had no way of knowing how husbands, sons and
brothers who'd gone off to war were faring, or what fate might lie in their own
uncertain futures. A bright halo was taken as a sign of good fortune, purplish

shadows as an indication that someone had died. When the flame crackled like
pine needles, a person they were expecting was sure to come.
      Osugi had forgotten how to interpret the omens, but tonight the cheerful
halo, as colorfully beautiful as a rainbow, suggested something splendid in the
offing.
      Could it have been Matahachi? Her hand reached toward the brush once
but drew back. As though entranced, she forgot herself and her surroundings and
for the next hour or two thought only of her son's face, which seemed to float
about in the darkness of the room.
      A rustling noise at the back entrance brought her out of her reverie.
Wondering if a weasel was playing havoc with her kitchen, she took the candle
and went to investigate.
      The sack of vegetables was by the sink; on top of the sack was a white
object. Picking it up, she found it was heavy—as heavy as two pieces of gold.
On the white paper in which they were wrapped, Matahachi had written: "I still
don't have the heart to face you. Please forgive me if I neglect you for another
six months. I'll just leave this note, without coming in."


       A samurai with murder in his eyes was crashing through the tall grass to
reach two men standing on the riverbank. Gasping for breath, he called,
"Hamada, was it him?"
      "No," groaned Hamada. "Wrong man." But his eyes sparkled as he
      continued to survey the surroundings.
      "I'm sure it was."
      "It wasn't. It was a boatman."
      "Are you sure?"
      "When I ran after him, he climbed into that boat over there."
      "That doesn't make him a boatman."
      "I checked."
      "I must say, he's fast on his feet."
      Turning away from the river, they started back through the fields of
      Hamachō.
      "Matahachi ... Matahachi!"
       At first, the sound barely rose above the murmuring of the river, but as it
was repeated and became unmistakable, they stopped and looked at one another
in astonishment.

     "Somebody's calling him! How could that be?"
     "Sounds like an old woman."
     With Hamada in the lead, they quickly traced the sound to its source, and
     when Osugi heard their footsteps, she ran toward them.
     "Matahachi? Is one of you—"
     They surrounded her and pinioned her arms behind her.
     "What are you doing to me?" Puffing up like an enraged blowfish, she
     shouted, "Who are you anyway?"
     "We're students of the Ono School."
     "I don't know anybody named Ono."
     "You never heard of Ono Tadaaki, tutor to the shōgun?"
     "Never."
     "Why, you old—"
     "Wait. Let's see what she knows about Matahachi."
     "I'm his mother."
     "You're the mother of Matahachi, the melon vendor?"
      "What do you mean, you pig! Melon vendor! Matahachi is a descendant of
the House of Hon'iden, and that's an important family in the province of
Mimasaka. I'll have you know the Hon'idens are high-ranking retainers of
Shimmen Munetsura, lord of Takeyama Castle in Yoshino."
     "Enough of this," said one man.
     "What should we do?"
     "Pick her up and carry her."
     "Hostage? Do you think it'll work?"
     "If she's his mother, he'll have to come for her."
     Osugi pulled her scrawny body together and fought like a cornered tigress,
     but to no avail.


      Bored and dissatisfied these past several weeks, Kojirō had fallen into the
habit of sleeping a lot, in the daytime as well as at night. At the moment, he was
lying on his back, grumbling to himself, hugging his sword to his chest.
      "It's enough to make my Drying Pole weep. A sword like this, a
swordsman like myself—rotting away in another man's house!"
     There was a loud click and a metallic flash.
     "Stupid fool!"
     Striking in a great arc above him, the weapon slithered back into its

      scabbard like a living creature.
       "Splendid!" cried a servant from the edge of the veranda. "Are you
practicing a technique for striking from a supine position?"
       "Don't be silly," sniffed Kojirō. He turned over onto his stomach, picked
up two specks and flicked them toward the veranda. "It was making a nuisance
of itself."
      The servant's eyes widened. The insect, resembling a moth, had had both its
      soft wings and tiny body sliced neatly in two.
      "Are you here to lay out my bedding?" asked Kojirō.
      "Oh, no! Sorry! There's a letter for you."
       Kojirō unhurriedly unfolded the letter and began to read. As he read, a
touch of excitement came to his face. According to Yajibei, Osugi had been
missing since the night before. Kojirō was requested to come at once and confer
on a course of action.
       The letter explained in some detail how they had learned where she was.
Yajibei had had all his men out searching for her all day long, but the crux of the
matter was the message Kojirō had left at the Donjiki. It had been crossed out
and beside it was written: "To Sasaki Kojirō: The person holding Matahachi's
mother in custody is Hamada Toranosuke of the House of Ono."
       "Finally," said Kojirō, the words coming from deep in his throat. At the
time he'd rescued Matahachi, he'd suspected that the two samurai he cut down
had some connection with the Ono School.
       He chuckled and said, "Just what I was waiting for." Standing on the
veranda, he glanced up at the night sky. There were clouds, but it didn't look like
rain.
       Very shortly afterward, he was seen riding up the Takanawa highroad on a
rented packhorse. It was late when he reached the Hangawara house. After
questioning Yajibei in detail, he made up his mind to spend the night there and
move into action the next morning.


      Ono Tadaaki had received his new name not long after the Battle of
Sekigahara. It was as Mikogami Tenzen that he'd been summoned to Hidetada's
encampment to lecture on swordsmanship, which he did with distinction. Along
with bestowal of the name came his appointment as a direct vassal of the
Tokugawas and the granting of a new residence on Kanda Hill in Edo.
      Since the hill afforded an excellent view of Mount Fuji, the shogunate

designated it as a residential district for retainers from Suruga, the province in
which Fuji was situated.
       "I was told the house is on Saikachi Slope," said Kojirō.
       He and one of Hangawara's men were at the top of the hill. In the deep
valley below them, they could see Ochanomizu, a section of river from which
water for the shōgun's tea was said to be drawn.
       "Wait here," said Kojirō's guide. "I'll see where it is." He returned shortly
with the information that they had already passed it.
       "I don't remember any place that looked as though it might belong to the
shōgun's tutor."
       "Neither did I. I thought he'd have a big mansion, like Yagyū Munenori.
But his house is that old one we saw on the right. I've heard it used to belong to
the shōgun's stable keeper."
       "I suppose it's nothing to be surprised about. Ono's only worth fifteen
hundred bushels. Most of Munenori's income was earned by his ancestors."
       "This is it," said the guide, pointing.
       Kojirō stopped to inspect the general layout of the buildings. The old
earthen wall extended back from the middle section of the slope to a thicket on a
hill beyond. The compound appeared to be quite large. From the doorless gate he
could see, beyond the main house, a building he took to be the dōjō and an
annex, apparently of more recent construction.
       "You can go back now," said Kojirō. "And tell Yajibei if I don't return with
the old lady by evening, he can assume I've been killed."
       "Yes, sir." The man ran swiftly down Saikachi Slope, stopping several
times to look back.
       Kojirō hadn't wasted any time trying to get near Yagyū Munenori. There
was no way to defeat him and thereby take for himself the other man's glory, for
the Yagyū Style was the one actually employed by the Tokugawas. That in itself
was sufficient excuse for Munenori to refuse to take on ambitious rōnin. Tadaaki
was inclined to take on all corners.
       Compared with the Yagyū Style, Ono's was more practical, the aim being
not to make a great display of skill but to actually kill. Kojirō had heard of no
one who had succeeded in attacking the House of Ono and putting it to shame.
While Munenori was in general the more highly respected, Tadaaki was
considered the stronger.
       Ever since coming to Edo and learning of this situation, Kojirō had told
himself that one of these days he would be knocking on the Ono gate.

       Numata Kajūrō glanced out the window of the dōjō's dressing room. He
did a double take and his eyes swept the room, looking for Toranosuke. Spotting
him in the middle of the room, giving a lesson to a younger student, he ran to his
side and, in a low voice, sputtered, "He's here! Out there, in the front yard!"
       Toranosuke, his wooden sword poised in front of him, shouted to the
student, "On guard." Then he pressed forward, his footsteps resounding sharply
on the floor. Just as the two reached the north corner, the student did a
somersault and his wooden sword went sailing through the air.
       Toranosuke turned and said, "Who are you talking about? Kojirō?" "Yes,
he's just inside the gate. He'll be here any minute."
       "Much sooner than I expected. Taking the old lady hostage was a good
idea."
       "What do you plan to do now? Who's going to greet him? It should be
someone who's prepared for anything. If he has the nerve to come here alone, he
may try a surprise move."
       "Have him brought to the dōjō. I'll greet him myself. The rest of you stay
in the background and keep quiet."
       "At least there're plenty of us here," said Kajūrō. Looking around, he was
encouraged to see the faces of stalwarts like Kamei Hyōsuke, Negoro Hachikurō
and Itō Magobei. There were also about twenty others; they had no idea of
Kojirō's way of thinking, but they all knew why Toranosuke wanted him here.
       One of the two men Kojirō had killed near the Donjiki was Toranosuke's
elder brother. Though he was a good-for-nothing, not well thought of at school,
his death nevertheless had to be avenged because of the blood relationship.
       Despite his youth and his modest income, Toranosuke was a samurai to be
reckoned with in Edo. Like the Tokugawas, he came originally from Mikawa
Province, and his family was numbered among the oldest of the shōgun's
hereditary vassals. He was also one of the "four generals of Saikachi Slope," the
others being Kamei, Negoro and Itō.
       When Toranosuke had come home the night before with Osugi, the
consensus was that he had scored a noteworthy coup. Now it would be difficult
for Kojirō not to show his face. The men vowed that if he did appear, they would
beat him within an inch of his life, cut off his nose and hang him on a tree by the
Kanda River for all to see. But they were by no means certain he'd show up; in
fact, they had placed wagers on it, the majority betting that he wouldn't.

       Assembling in the main room of the dōjō, they left the floor space open in
the middle and waited anxiously.
       After a time, one man asked Kajūrō, "Are you sure it was Kojirō you
saw?" "Absolutely sure."
       They sat in formidable array. Their faces, woodenly stiff at first, were now
showing signs of strain. Some feared that if this kept up much longer, they would
fall victim to their own tenseness. Just as the breaking point seemed near, the
rapid patter of sandals came to a halt outside the dressing room, and the face of
another student, standing on tiptoe, appeared in the window.
       "Listen! There's no sense in waiting here. Kojirō's not coming."
       "What do you mean? Kajūrō just saw him."
       "Yes, but he went straight to the house. How he got admitted, I don't know,
but he's in the guest room talking with the master."
       "The master?" echoed the group with a collective gasp.
       "Are you telling the truth?" demanded Toranosuke, the look on his face
close to consternation. He strongly suspected that if the circumstances of his
brother's death were investigated, it would turn out that he'd been up to no good,
but he'd glossed over this in relating the incident to Tadaaki. And if his master
knew he'd abducted Osugi, it wasn't because he himself had told him.
      "If you don't believe me, go look."
      "What a mess!" groaned Toranosuke.
      Far from sympathizing with him, his fellow students were annoyed by his
      lack of decisiveness.
       Advising the others to keep cool while they went to see what the situation
was, Kamei and Negoro were just stepping into their zōri when an attractive,
light-complexioned girl came running out of the house. Recognizing Omitsu,
they stopped where they were and the others rushed to the doorway.
       "All of you," she cried in an excited, shrill voice. "Come right away! Uncle
and the guest have drawn swords. In the garden. They're fighting!"
       Though Omitsu was officially regarded as Tadaaki's niece, it had been
whispered about that she was really the daughter of Itō Ittōsai by a mistress.
Rumor had it that since Ittōsai was Tadaaki's teacher, Tadaaki must have agreed
to rear the girl.
       The look of fear in her eyes was most unusual. "I heard Uncle and the
guest talking—their voices got louder and louder—and the next thing I knew ... I
don't suppose Uncle's in danger, but—"
       The four generals emitted a collective yelp and lit out for the garden,

which was set off from the outer compound by a shrub fence. The others caught
up with them at the woven-bamboo gate.
       "The gate's locked."
       "Can't you force it?"
       This proved unnecessary. The gate gave way under the weight of the
samurai pressing against it. As it fell, a spacious area backed by a hill came into
view. Tadaaki, his faithful Yukihira sword held at eye level, stood in the middle.
Beyond him, at a fair distance, was Kojirō, the great Drying Pole rising above
his head, fire shooting from his eyes.
       The charged atmosphere seemed to create an invisible barrier. For men
raised in the strict tradition of the samurai class, the awe-inspiring solemnity
surrounding the combatants, the dignity of the deadly unsheathed swords, was
inviolable. Despite their agitation, the spectacle momentarily deprived the
students both of their mobility and of their emotions.
       But then two or three of them started toward Kojirō's rear.
       "Stay back!" cried Tadaaki angrily. His voice, harsh and chilling, not at all
the fatherly voice they were accustomed to, arrested all movement on the part of
his students.
       People were apt to guess Tadaaki's age to be as much as ten years less than
his fifty-four or -five years and take his height for average, whereas actually it
was somewhat less than that. His hair was still black, his body small but solidly
built. There was nothing stiff or awkward in the movements of his long limbs.
       Kojirō had not yet made one strike—had not, in fact, been able to.
       Yet Tadaaki had had to face one fact instantly: he was up against a terrific
swordsman. "He's another Zenki!" he thought with an imperceptible shudder.
       Zenki was the last fighter he had encountered to have such scope and
driving ambition. And that had been long ago, in his youth, when he traveled
with Ittōsai, living the life of a shugyōsha. Zenki, the son of a boatman in
Kuwana Province, had been Ittōsai's senior disciple. As Ittōsai aged, Zenki
began to look down on him, even proclaiming that the Ittō Style was his own
invention.
       Zenki had caused Ittōsai much grief, for the more adept he became with
the sword, the more harm he caused other people. "Zenki," Ittōsai had lamented,
"is the greatest mistake in my life. When I look at him, I see a monster
embodying all the bad qualities I ever had. It makes me hate myself to watch
him."
       Ironically, Zenki served the youthful Tadaaki well—as a bad example—

spurring him to higher achievements than might otherwise have been possible.
Eventually, Tadaaki clashed with the evil prodigy at Koganegahara in Shimōsa
and killed him, whereupon Ittōsai awarded him his certificate in the Ittō Style
and gave him the book of secret instructions.
       Zenki's one flaw had been that his technical capability was marred by a
lack of breeding. Not so Kojirō. His intelligence and education were evident in
his swordsmanship.
       "I can't win this fight," thought Tadaaki, who felt himself in no way
inferior to Munenori. In fact, his assessment of Munenori's skill was not very
high.
       While he stared at his awesome opponent, another truth came home to rest.
"Time appears to have passed me by," he thought ruefully.
       They stood motionless; not the slightest change was evident. But both
Tadaaki and Kojirō were expending vital energy at a fearful rate. The
physiological toll took the form of sweat pouring copiously from their foreheads,
air rushing through flaring nostrils, skin turning white, then bluish. Though a
move seemed imminent, the swords remained poised and unwavering.
       "I give up," said Tadaaki, abruptly dropping back several paces. They had
agreed it was not to be a fight to the finish. Either man could withdraw by
acknowledging defeat.
       Springing like a beast of prey, Kojirō brought the Drying Pole into action
with a downward stroke of whirlwind force and speed. Though Tadaaki ducked
just in time, his topknot flew up and was lopped off. Tadaaki himself, while
dodging, executed a brilliant reprisal, slicing off some six inches of Kojirō's
sleeve.
       "Coward!" rose the cry from the students, whose faces burned with rage.
By seizing on his opponent's capitulation as the opening for an attack, Kojirō had
violated the samurai's code of ethics.
       Every one of the students started for Kojirō.
       He responded by flying with the speed of a cormorant to a large jujube tree
at one end of the garden and half hiding himself behind the trunk. His eyes
shifted with intimidating rapidity.
       "Did you see it?" he shouted. "Did you see who won?"
       "They saw it," said Tadaaki. "Hold off!" he told his men, sheathing his
sword and returning to the veranda of his study.
       Summoning Omitsu, he told her to tie up his hair. While she was doing
this, he caught his breath. His chest glistened with rivulets of sweat.

       An old saying came back to his mind: it is easy to surpass a predecessor,
but difficult to avoid being surpassed by a successor. He'd been enjoying the
fruits of hard training in his youth, complacent in the knowledge that his Ittō
Style was no less flourishing than the Yagyū Style. Meanwhile society was
giving birth to new geniuses like Kojirō. The realization came as a bitter shock,
but he was not the sort of man to ignore it.
       When Omitsu was finished, he said, "Give our young guest some water to
rinse his mouth out with and show him back to the guest room."
       The faces of the students around him were white with shock. Some were
forcing back tears; others stared resentfully at their master.
       "We'll assemble in the dōjō," he said. "Now." He himself led the way.
Tadaaki took his place on the raised seat in front and silently contemplated the
three rows of his followers sitting facing him.
       At length he lowered his eyes and said quietly, "I fear that I, too, have
become old. As I look back, it seems to me my best days as a swordsman were
when I defeated that devil Zenki. By the time this school was opened and people
began talking about the Ono group on Saikachi Slope, calling the Ittō Style
unbeatable, I'd already passed my peak as a swordsman."
       The meaning of the words was so alien to their customary way of thinking
that the students could not believe their ears.
       His voice became firmer, and he looked directly at their doubting,
discontented faces. "In my opinion, this is something that happens to all men.
Age creeps up on us while we're not looking. Times change. The followers
surpass their leaders. A younger generation opens up a new way.... This is the
way it ought to be, for the world advances only through change. Yet this is
inadmissible in the field of swordsmanship. The Way of the Sword must be a
way that does not permit a man to age.
       "Ittōsai ... I don't know if he's still alive. I've had no word from my master
for years. After Koganegahara, he took the tonsure and retreated to the
mountains. His aim, he said, was to study the sword, to practice Zen, to search
for the Way of Life and Death, to climb the great peak of perfect enlightenment.
       "Now it's my turn. After today, I could no longer hold my head up before
my master.... I regret I haven't lived a better life."
       "M-m-master!" broke in Negoro Hachikurō. "You say you lost, but we
don't believe you'd lose to a man like Kojirō under normal circumstances, even if
he is young. There must have been something wrong today."
       "Something wrong?" Tadaaki shook his head and chuckled. "Nothing

wrong. Kojirō's young. But that's not why I lost. I lost because the times have
changed."
       "What does that mean?"
       "Listen and see." He looked from Hachikurō to the other silent faces. "I'll
try to make it brief, because Kojirō is waiting for me. I want you to listen
carefully to my thoughts and my hopes for the future."
       He then informed them that as of this day, he was retiring from the dōjō.
His intention was not to retire in the ordinary sense but to follow in the footsteps
of Ittōsai and go out in search of great enlightenment.
       "That is my first great hope," he told them.
       Next, he requested Itō Magobei, his nephew, to take charge of his only son,
Tadanari. Magobei was also enjoined to report the day's happenings to the
shogunate and explain that Tadaaki had decided to become a Buddhist priest.
       Then he said, "I have no deep regrets over my defeat by a younger man.
What does trouble and shame me is this: new fighters like Sasaki are appearing
in other quarters, but not a single swordsman of his caliber has come out of the
Ono School. I think I know why. A lot of you are hereditary vassals of the
shōgun. You've let your status go to your heads. After a bit of training, you begin
congratulating yourselves on being masters of the 'invincible Ittō Style.' You're
too self-satisfied."
       "Wait, sir," Hyōsuke protested in a trembling voice. "That's not fair. Not all
of us are lazy and arrogant. We don't all neglect our studies."
       "Shut up!" Tadaaki glared at him fiercely. "Laxness on the part of students
is a reflection of laxness on the part of the teacher. I'm confessing my own shame
now, passing judgment on myself.
       "The task ahead of you is to eliminate laxness, to make the Ono School a
center where youthful talent can develop correctly. It must become a training
ground for the future. Unless it does, my leaving and making way for a reform
will accomplish nothing."
       At last, the sincerity of his statement began to take effect. His students
hung their heads, pondering his words, each reflecting on his own shortcomings.
"Hamada," said Tadaaki.
       Toranosuke replied, "Yes, sir," but he was obviously taken by surprise.
Under Tadaaki's cold stare, his own eyes dropped to the floor.
      "Stand up."
      "Yes, sir," he said, without rising.
      "Stand up! This instant."

      Toranosuke rose to his feet. The others looked on mutely.
       "I'm expelling you from the school." He paused to let this sink in. "But in
doing so, I hope there will come a day when you'll have mended your ways,
learned discipline and grasped the meaning of the Art of War. Perhaps at that
time we can be together again as teacher and student. Now get out!"
      "M-master, why? I don't remember doing anything to deserve this."
      "You don't remember because you don't understand the Art of War. If you
      think about it long and carefully, you'll see."
      "Tell me, please. I can't leave until you do." The veins stood out on his
      forehead.
       "All right. Cowardice is the most shameful weakness a samurai can be
accused of. The Art of War admonishes strictly against it. It is an ironclad rule at
this school that any man guilty of a cowardly act must be expelled.
       "Nevertheless, you, Hamada Toranosuke, let several weeks pass after your
brother's death before challenging Sasaki Kojirō. In the meantime, you ran
around trying to take revenge on some insignificant melon vendor. And
yesterday you took this man's aged mother captive and brought her here. Do you
call that conduct becoming a samurai?"
       "But, sir, you don't understand. I did it to draw Kojirō out." He was about
to launch into a spirited defense, but Tadaaki cut him short.
       "That's precisely what I mean by cowardice. If you wanted to fight Kojirō,
why didn't you go directly to his house? Why didn't you send him a message
challenging him? Why didn't you declare your name and your purpose?"
       "W-w-well, I did consider those things, but—"
       "Consider? There was nothing to stop you from doing that. But you
adopted the cowardly ruse of getting others to help you lure Kojirō here so you
could attack him en masse. By comparison, Kojirō's attitude was admirable."
Tadaaki paused. "He came alone, to see me personally. Refusing to have
anything to do with a coward, he challenged me, on the grounds that a student's
misconduct is his teacher's misconduct.
      "The result of the confrontation between his sword and mine revealed a
      shameful crime. I now humbly confess that crime."
      The room was deathly quiet.
      "Now, Toranosuke, upon reflection, do you still believe yourself to be a
      samurai without shame?"
      "Forgive me."
      "Get out."

     Eyes downcast, Toranosuke walked backward ten paces and knelt on the
     floor with his arms before him, preparatory to bowing.
     "I wish you the best of health, sir.... And the same to the rest of you." His
     voice was dark.
     He rose and walked sadly from the dōjō.
       Tadaaki stood up. "I, too, must take my leave of the world." Suppressed
sobs were audible. His final words were stern, yet full of affection. "Why
mourn? Your day has come. It's up to you to see that this school advances into a
new age with honor. Beginning now, be humble, work hard and try with all your
might to cultivate your spirit."
       Returning to the guest room, Tadaaki appeared quite unperturbed as he
quietly took a seat and addressed Kojirō.
       After apologizing for keeping him waiting, he said, "I've just expelled
Hamada. I advised him to change his ways, to try to understand the real meaning
of the samurai's discipline. I intend, of course, to release the old woman. Would
you like to take her back with you, or should I arrange for her to go later?"
       "I'm satisfied with what you've done. She can go with me." Kojirō moved
as though to rise. The bout had completely drained him, and the subsequent wait
had seemed very, very long.
       "Don't go yet," said Tadaaki. "Now that it's all over, let's have a cup
together and let bygones be bygones." Clapping his hands, he called, "Omitsu!
Bring some sake."
       "Thank you," said Kojirō. "It's kind of you to ask me." He smiled and said
hypocritically, "I know now why Ono Tadaaki and the Ittō Style are so famous."
He had no respect whatsoever for Tadaaki.
       "If his natural talents are developed in the right way," thought Tadaaki,
"the world will bow at his feet. But if he takes the wrong turn, there's another
Zenki in the making."
       "If you were my student—" The words were on the tip of Tadaaki's tongue.
Instead of saying them, he laughed and replied modestly to Kojirō's flattery.
       In the course of their conversation, Musashi's name came up and Kojirō
learned he was under consideration to become one of the select group of men
who gave lessons to the shōgun.
       Kojirō merely said, "Oh?" But his expression betrayed his displeasure.
Turning his eyes quickly toward the setting sun, he insisted it was time for him
to go.
       Not many days after that, Tadaaki vanished from Edo. He had the

reputation of being a simple, straightforward warrior, the embodiment of honesty
and selflessness, but a man who lacked Munenori's knack for politics. Not
understanding why a man who could apparently accomplish anything he set his
mind to would flee the world, people were consumed with curiosity and read all
sorts of meanings into his disappearance.
       As a result of his failure, Tadaaki, it was said, had lost his mind.
