The Gateway to Glory


       Before sitting down to breakfast, the gateman raked the garden, set fire to
the leaves and opened the gate. Shinzō had been up for some time too. He started
his day as he always did, by reading a selection from the Chinese classics. This
was followed by sword practice.
      From the well, where he'd gone to wash, he walked to the stable to have a
      look at the horses.
      "Groom," he called.
      "Yes, sir."
      "Isn't the chestnut roan back yet?"
      "No, but it isn't the horse I'm worried about so much as the boy."
      "Don't worry about Iori. He grew up in the country. He can take care of
      himself."
      The elderly gateman came up to Shinzō and informed him that some men
      had come to see him and were waiting in the garden.
      Walking toward the house, Shinzō waved, and as he came up to them, one
      man said, "It's been a long time."
      "It's good to see you all together again," said Shinzō.
      "How's your health?"
      "Splendid, as you can see."
      "We heard you'd been wounded."
       "It didn't amount to much. What brings you here at this early hour?"
"There's a little matter we'd like to talk over with you."
       The five former students of Obata Kagenori, all handsome sons of banner
guards or Confucian scholars, exchanged significant glances.
       "Let's go over there," said Shinzō, indicating a maple-covered hillock in
one corner of the garden.
       Coming to the gateman's fire, they stopped and stood around it.
       Shinzō put his hand to his neck, then noticing the others were looking at
him, said, "When it's cold, it does ache a little." They took turns examining the
scar.
       "I heard that was the work of Sasaki Kojirō."
       There was a short, tense silence.

       "As it happens, our purpose in coming today was to talk about Kojirō.
Yesterday we learned he was the man who killed Yogorō."
       "I suspected that. Do you have any proof?"
       "Circumstantial, but convincing. Yogorō's body was found at the bottom of
Isarago Hill, behind the temple. Kakubei's house is halfway up the hill. Kojirō
was living there."
       "Hmm. I wouldn't be surprised if Yogorō went alone to see Kojirō."
       "We're pretty sure that's what happened. Three or four nights before the
       body was found, a florist saw a man answering to Yogorō's description
climbing the hill. Kojirō must've killed him and carried the body down the hill."
The six men stared solemnly at each other, their eyes reflecting their silent
      anger.
      Shinzō, his face reddened by the fire, asked, "Is that all?"
      "No. We wanted to talk about the future of the House of Obata and how
      we're going to take care of Kojirō."
       Shinzō stood lost in thought. The man who had spoken first said, "You
may have heard this already. Kojirō's become a vassal of Lord Hosokawa
Tadatoshi. He's on his way to Buzen now, and he hasn't paid for what he did—
ruin our master's reputation, kill his only son and heir and slaughter our
comrades."
       "Shinzō," urged a third man, "as disciples of Obata Kagenori, we have to
do something."
       Bits of white ash drifted up from the fire. One man caught a whiff of
smoke and coughed.
       After listening to them for a few minutes, as they expressed their bitter
indignation, Shinzō said, "I'm one of the victims, of course, and I have a plan of
my own. But tell me just what you have in mind."
       "We're thinking of lodging a protest with Lord Hosokawa. We'll tell him
the whole story and ask that Kojirō be turned over to us."
       "Then what?"
       "We'll see his head up on a pike in front of the graves of our teacher and
his son."
       "You might be able to do that if he were turned over to you tied up. But the
Hosokawas aren't likely to do that. Even though he's only recently been engaged,
he is their vassal, and it's his skill they're interested in. Your complaint would
only be taken as further proof of his ability. What daimyō is going to turn over
one of his vassals to anyone without compelling reasons?"

       "Then we'll have to take extreme measures."
       "Such as?"
       "The group he's traveling with is fairly large. We could easily catch up
with them. With you as our leader, the six of us and other loyal disciples—"
      "Are you suggesting attacking him?"
      "Yes. Go with us, Shinzō."
      "I don't like it."
       "Aren't you the one who's been chosen to carry on the Obata name?"
"Admitting an enemy is better than we are is difficult," Shinzō said thoughtfully.
"Still, objectively, Kojirō's the better swordsman. Even with dozens of men, I'm
afraid we'd only end up adding to our shame."
       "You're going to stand by and do nothing?" asked one man indignantly.
"No, I resent Kojirō's getting away with what he's done as much as any of you.
But I'm willing to wait until the time is right."
      "You're awfully patient," one man said sarcastically.
      "Aren't you evading your responsibility?" asked another.
      When Shinzō made no reply, the five men decided further talk was useless
      and departed in haste.
       On the way they passed Iori, who had dismounted at the gate and was
leading the horse to the stable. After tying the animal up, he saw Shinzō by the
fire and went to join him.
      "Oh, so you're back," said Shinzō.
      "Yes," said Iori. "Say, did you have a quarrel?"
      "Why do you ask?"
       "When I came in just now, I passed some samurai. They seemed angry.
They were saying strange things, like 'I overestimated him,' and 'He's a
weakling."'
       "That doesn't mean anything," said Shinzō with a little laugh. "Come
closer and warm yourself."
       "Who needs a fire? I rode all the way from Musashino without stopping."
"You seem in good spirits. Where did you stay last night?"
       "At the house. Sensei's back!"
      "I heard he was or soon would be."
      "You already knew?"
      "Takuan told me. Iori, have you heard the news?"
      "What news?"
       "Your teacher's going to be a great man. It's a wonderful stroke of luck for

him. He's going to be one of the shōgun's teachers. He'll be the founder of his
own school of swordsmanship."
     "Do you mean that?"
     "Does it make you happy?"
     "Of course—happier than anything. Can I borrow the horse?"
     "Now? You just came back."
     "I'll go and tell him."
      "You don't have to do that. Before the day's out, the Council of Elders will
issue a formal summons. As soon as we receive word, I'll go myself and tell
Musashi."
      "Will he come here?"
      "Yes," Shinzō assured him. With a last look at the dying fire, he started
toward the house, cheered a bit by Iori but worried about the fate of his angry
friends.
      The summons was not long in coming. A messenger arrived about two
hours later with a letter for Takuan and an order for Musashi to appear the
following day at the Reception Pavilion just outside Wadakura Gate. After his
appointment was confirmed, he would be received in audience by the shōgun.
      When Shinzō, with an attendant, reached the house on Musashino Plain, he
found Musashi sitting in the sun with a kitten on his lap, talking with
Gonnosuke.
     Words were few. Shinzo said only, "I've come for you."
     "Thanks," said Musashi. "I was about to call you to thank you for looking
     after Iori."
     Without further ado, he mounted the horse Shinzō had brought along for
     him and they returned to Ushigome.
      That evening, as he sat with Takuan and Lord Ujikatsu, he felt immensely
fortunate to be able to regard these men, as well as Shinzō, as true friends.
      In the morning, Musashi awoke to find clothes suitable to the occasion
already laid out for him, together with such things as a fan and tissue paper. And
at breakfast, Lord Ujikatsu said to him, "It's a great day. You should rejoice."
The meal included rice with red beans, a whole sea bream for each person and
other dishes served only on festive occasions. The menu was very much as it
would have been for a coming-of-age ceremony in the Hōjō family.
      Musashi wanted to refuse the appointment. In Chichibu, he had
reconsidered his two years in Hōtengahara and his ambition to put his
swordsmanship to work in the interest of good government. Now the belief that

Edo, not to speak of the rest of the country, was ready for the type of ideal
government he envisioned seemed less tenable. The sanctity of the Way and the
application of the principles of swordsmanship for the sake of peace seemed no
more than lofty ideals, at least until either Edo or Osaka succeeded in
consolidating its rule over the whole country. And he hadn't made up his mind
on another point: if the final battle were to come tomorrow, should he support
the Eastern Army or the Western Army? Or should he leave the world behind
and survive on mountain grasses until peace was restored?
       Even on this morning, he could not escape the feeling that if he contented
himself with a high position, his pursuit of the Way would be aborted.
       But he couldn't refuse. What finally swayed him was the trust in him
shown by his supporters. There was no way to say no; he could not break faith
with Takuan, his old friend and stern mentor, and Lord Ujikatsu, now a valued
acquaintance.
       Dressed in formal attire and riding a splendid horse with a beautiful
saddle, he set forth on a brilliantly sunlit road for the castle, each step
supposedly carrying him closer to the gateway to glory.
       In front of the Reception Pavilion was a graveled courtyard and, on a high
post, a sign saying: "Dismount." As Musashi got off the horse, an official and
one of the stablemen came forward.
       "My name is Miyamoto Musashi," he announced in a formal tone of voice.
"I have come in response to a summons issued yesterday by the Council of
Elders. May I request that you show me to the official in charge of the waiting
room?" He had come alone, as was expected of him. Another official came and
escorted him to the waiting room, where he was advised to stay "until there is
word from within."
       It was a large room, more than twenty mats in size, known as the "Orchid
Room," after the paintings of birds and spring orchids on the walls and door
panels. Before long, a servant came with tea and cakes, but that was Musashi's
only contact with human beings for nearly half a day. The little birds in the
pictures did not sing, the orchids gave off no fragrance. Musashi began to yawn.
       He assumed that the ruddy-faced, white-haired man who eventually
appeared was one of the ministers. Perhaps in his prime he had been a
distinguished warrior.
       "You're Musashi, are you?" Lord Sakai Tadakatsu said lightly as he sat
down. "Forgive us for making you wait so long." Though Lord of Kawagoe and
a well-known daimyō, in the shōgun's castle he was merely another official,

attended by only one samurai. His manner suggested he cared little about pomp
or protocol.
       Musashi bowed to the floor and remained in this position as he announced
in stiffly formal language: "My name is Miyamoto Musashi. I am a rōnin from
Mimasaka, the son of Munisai, who was descended from the Shimmen family. I
have come to the castle gate in compliance with the shōgun's will, as stated in
the summons sent to me."
       Tadakatsu nodded several times, causing his double chin to shake. "Many
thanks for your trouble," he said, but then went on in an apologetic vein: "With
regard to your appointment to official position, for which you were
recommended by the priest Takuan and Lord Hōjō of Awa, there was, last
evening, a sudden change in the shōgun's plans. As a result, you will not be
engaged. Since several of us were not satisfied with this decision, the Council of
Elders reviewed this matter today. In fact, we have been discussing it until just
now. We took the question to the shōgun again. I am sorry to say that we were
unable to alter this latest decision."
       There was sympathy in his eyes, and he seemed for a moment to be
searching for words of consolation. "In our fleeting world," he went on, "this sort
of thing happens all the time. You mustn't let yourself be annoyed by what
people say about you. In matters having to do with official appointments, it is
often difficult to tell whether one has been fortunate or unfortunate."
       Musashi, still bowing, said, "Yes, sir."
       Tadakatsu's words were music to his ears. Gratitude swelled from the
bottom of his heart, filling his whole body.
       "I understand the decision, sir. I am grateful to you." The words came out
naturally. Musashi was not concerned with face, nor was he being ironic. He felt
that a being greater than the shōgun had just bestowed on him an appointment
much higher than that of official tutor. The word of the gods had been
vouchsafed to him.
       "He took it well," thought Tadakatsu, gazing rather pointedly at Musashi.
Aloud he said, "Perhaps it is presumptuous of me, but I've been told you have
artistic interests unusual in a samurai. I would like to show an example of your
work to the shōgun. Replying to the malicious gossip of ordinary people is
unimportant. I think it would be more befitting a noble samurai to rise above the
babble of the crowd and leave behind a wordless testimony to the purity of his
heart. A work of art would be appropriate, don't you think?"
       While Musashi was still pondering the meaning of this, Tadakatsu said, "I

hope I will see you again," and left the room.
       Musashi raised his head and sat up straight. It was a couple of minutes
before he grasped the meaning of Tadakatsu's words—that is, there was no need
to answer malicious gossip, but he had to give evidence of his character. If he
could do this, his honor would be unsullied, and the men who had recommended
him would suffer no loss of face.
       Musashi's eye fell on a six-panel screen in one corner of the room. It was
invitingly blank. Summoning a young samurai from the guard room, he
explained that Lord Sakai had asked him to draw a picture and requested
materials with which to comply—brushes, ink of good quality, some aged
cinnabar and a bit of blue pigment.
       It occurred to Musashi what an odd fact it was that most children could
draw—and sing, for that matter—but that they forgot how to as they grew older.
Perhaps the little bit of wisdom they acquired inhibited them. He himself was no
exception. As a child he had often drawn pictures, this having been one of his
favorite ways of overcoming loneliness. But from the age of thirteen or fourteen
until he was past twenty, he gave up drawing almost entirely.
       In the course of his travels he had often stopped over at temples or the
houses of the wealthy, where he had the opportunity to see good paintings—
murals, or scrolls hanging in alcoves—and this had given him a lively interest in
art.
       The aristocratic simplicity and subtle profundity of Liang-k'ai's painting of
chestnuts had made an especially deep impression. After seeing that work at
Kōetsu's house, he had availed himself of every opportunity to view rare Chinese
paintings of the Sung dynasty, the works of the fifteenth-century Japanese Zen
masters and the paintings of contemporary masters of the Kanō School,
particularly Kanō Sanraku and Kaihō Yūshō. Naturally, he had his likes and
dislikes. Liang-k'ai's bold, virile brushwork, as seen by a swordsman's eye,
struck him as revealing the prodigious strength of a giant. Kaihō Yūshō, possibly
because he was of samurai origin, had in his old age achieved such a high degree
of purity that Musashi considered him a worthy man to take as a model. He was
also attracted by the light impromptu effects in the works of the hermit priest and
aesthete Shōkadō Shōjō, whom he liked all the more because he was reputed to
be a close friend of Takuan.
       Painting, which seemed far removed from the path he had chosen, was
hardly an art for a person who rarely spent a full month in any one place. Yet he
did paint from time to time.

       As in the case of other adults who have forgotten how to draw, his mind
would work, but not his spirit. Intent upon drawing skillfully, he was unable to
express himself naturally. Many had been the times he'd become discouraged
and quit. Then, sooner or later, some impulse invariably moved him to pick up
the brush again—in secret. Being ashamed of his paintings, he never showed
them to others, though he allowed people to inspect his sculpture.
       Until now, that is. To commemorate this fateful day, he resolved to paint a
picture fit for the shōgun, or anyone else, to see.
       He worked rapidly and without interruption until it was finished. Then he
quietly put the brush in a jar of water and left, without a single backward glance
at his work.
       In the courtyard, he did turn around for one last look at the imposing gate,
one question filling his mind: Did glory lie inside or outside the gate?
       Sakai Tadakatsu returned to the waiting room and sat for some time gazing
at the still damp painting. The picture was of Musashino Plain. In the middle,
appearing very large, was the rising sun. This, symbolizing Musashi's confidence
in his own integrity, was vermilion. The rest of the work was executed in ink to
capture the feeling of autumn on the plain.
       Tadakatsu said to himself, "We've lost a tiger to the wilds."
