Buzzing Insects


       Seated in a back room of the small house Kakubei had lent him, Kojirō
was examining the Drying Pole. After the incident with Hōjō Shinzō, he had
requested Kakubei to press the craftsman for the return of the weapon. It had
come back this morning.
       "It won't be polished, of course," Kojirō had predicted, but in fact the
sword had been worked on with an attention and care that were beyond his
wildest hopes. From the blue-black metal, rippling like the current of a deep-
running stream, there now sprang a brilliant white glow, the light of centuries
past. The rust spots, which had seemed like leprous blemishes, were gone; the
wavy tempering pattern between the blade's edge and the ridge line, hitherto
smudged with bloodstains, was now as serenely beautiful as a misty moon
floating in the sky.
       "It's like seeing it for the first time," marveled Kojirō. Unable to take his
eyes from the sword, he didn't hear the visitor calling from the front of the
house: "Are you here? ... Kojirō?"
       This part of the hill had been given the name Tsukinomisaki because of the
magnificent view it afforded of the rising moon. From his sitting room, Kojirō
could see the stretch of bay from Shiba to Shinagawa. Across the bay, frothy
clouds appeared to be on a level with his eyes. At this moment, the white of the
distant hills and the greenish blue of the water seemed fused with the blade.
       "Kojirō! Isn't anybody here?" This time the voice came from the grass-
woven side gate.
       Coming out of his reverie, he shouted, "Who is it?" and returned the sword
to its scabbard. "I'm in the back. If you want to see me, come around to the
veranda."
      "Oh, here you are," said Osugi, walking around to where she could see into
      the house.
      "Well, this is a surprise," said Kojirō cordially. "What brings you out on a
      hot day like this?"
      "Just a minute. Let me wash my feet. Then we can talk."
       "The well's over there. Be careful. It's quite deep. You, boy—go with her
and see she doesn't fall in." The man addressed as "boy" was a low-ranking

member of Hangawara's gang who had been sent along to guide Osugi.
        After washing her sweaty face and rinsing her feet, Osugi entered the
house and exchanged a few words of greeting. Noticing the pleasant breeze
coming off the bay, she squinted and said, "The house is nice and cool. Aren't
you afraid you'll get lazy, staying in a comfortable place like this?"
        Kojirō laughed. "I'm not like Matahachi."
        The old woman blinked her eyes sadly but ignored the barb. "Sorry I didn't
bring you a real gift," she said. "In place of one I'll give you a sutra I copied." As
she handed him the Sutra on the Great Love of Parents, she added, "Please read
it when you have time."
        After a perfunctory glance at her handiwork, Kojirō turned to her guide
and said, "That reminds me. Did you put up the signs I wrote for you?"
      "The ones telling Musashi to come out of hiding?"
      "Yes, those."
      "It took us two whole days, but we put one up at almost every important
      intersection."
        Osugi said, "We passed some on the way here. Everywhere they're posted,
people are standing around gossiping. It made me feel good to hear the things
they're saying about Musashi."
        "If he doesn't answer the challenge, he's finished as a samurai. The whole
country'll be laughing at him. That should be ample revenge for you, Granny."
        "Not on your life. Being laughed at isn't going to get through to him. He's
shameless. And it won't satisfy me either. I want to see him punished once and
for all."
        "Ha, ha," laughed Kojirō, amused by her tenacity. "You get older, but you
never give up, do you? By the way, did you come about anything in particular?"
        The old lady rearranged herself and explained that after more than two
years with Hangawara she felt she should be moving on. It was not right for her
to live on Yajibei's hospitality indefinitely; besides, she was tired of mothering a
houseful of roughnecks. She had seen a nice little place for rent in the vicinity of
Yoroi Ferry.
        "What do you think?" Her face was serious, questioning. "It doesn't look
like I'll find Musashi soon. And I have a feeling Matahachi's somewhere in Edo.
I think I should have some money sent from home and stay on for a while. But
by myself, as I said."
        There being no reason for Kojirō to object, he quickly agreed with her. His
own connection with the Hangawara ménage, entertaining and useful at the

beginning, was now a little embarrassing. It was certainly no asset to a rōnin
looking for a master. He had already decided to discontinue the practice sessions.
       Kojirō summoned one of Kakubei's subordinates and had him bring a
watermelon from the patch behind the house. They chatted while it was being
cut and served, but before long he showed his guest out, his manner rather
suggesting he preferred to have her out of the way before sundown.
       When they had left, he himself swept his rooms and sprinkled the garden
with well water. The morning glory and yam vines growing on the fence had
reached the top and returned to the ground again, threatening to ensnare the foot
of the stone water basin. Their white flowers waved in the evening breeze.
       In his room again, he lay down and wondered idly if his host would be on
duty that night at the Hosokawa house. The lamp, which would probably have
been blown out by the wind anyway, was unlit. The light of the moon, rising
beyond the bay, was already on his face.
       At the bottom of the hill, a young samurai was breaking through the
cemetery fence.
       Kakubei stabled the horse he rode to and from the Hosokawa mansion at a
florist's shop at the foot of Isarago Hill.
       This evening, curiously enough, there was no sign of the florist, who
always came out promptly to take charge of the animal. Not seeing him inside
the shop, Kakubei went around to the back and started to tether his horse to a
tree. As he did so, the florist came running out from behind the temple.
       Taking the reins from Kakubei's hands, he panted, "Sorry, sir. There was a
strange man in the cemetery, on his way up the hill. I shouted, told him there was
no pathway there. He turned and stared at me—angry he was—then
disappeared." He paused for a moment, peered up into the dark trees and added
worriedly, "Do you think he could be a burglar? They say a lot of daimyō houses
have been broken into recently."


       Kakubei had heard the rumors, but he replied with a short laugh, "That's all
talk, nothing more. If the man you saw was a burglar, I daresay he was a petty
thief or one of the rōnin who waylay people on the streets."
       "Well, we're right here at the entrance to the Tōkaidō, and lots of travelers
have been attacked by men fleeing to other provinces. It makes me nervous
when I see suspicious-looking men around at night."
       "If anything happens, run up the hill and knock at my gate. The man

staying with me is chafing at the bit, always complaining there's never any action
around here."
       "You mean Sasaki Kojirō? He's got quite a reputation as a swordsman here
in the neighborhood."
       Hearing this did Kakubei's self-esteem no harm. Apart from liking young
people, he knew quite well that it was regarded as both admirable and wise for
established samurai like himself to take on promising younger men as protégés.
Should an emergency arise, there could be no more persuasive proof of his
loyalty than to be able to furnish his lord with good fighters. And if one of them
turned out to be outstanding, due credit would be given to the retainer who had
recommended him. One of Kakubei's beliefs was that self-interest was an
undesirable trait in a vassal; nevertheless, he was realistic. In a large fief, there
were few retainers willing to disregard their own interests entirely.
       Despite the fact that he held his position through heredity, Kakubei was as
loyal to Lord Tadatoshi as the other retainers, without being the sort who would
strive to outdo others in demonstrating his fealty. For purposes of routine
administration, men of his type were on the whole much more satisfactory than
the firebrands who sought to perform spectacular feats.
       "I'm back," he called on entering the gate to his house. The hill was quite
steep, and he was always a little winded when he reached this point. Since he
had left his wife in the country and the house was populated mostly by men, with
only a few woman servants, feminine touches tended to be lacking. Yet on
evenings when he had no night duty, he invariably found the stone path from the
red gate to the entrance inviting, for it had been freshly watered down in
anticipation of his return. And no matter how late the hour, someone always
came to the front door to greet him.
      "Is Kojirō here?" he asked.
      "He's been in all day," replied the servant. "He's lying down in his room,
      enjoying the breeze."
      "Good. Get some sake ready and ask him to come in to see me."
       While preparations were being made, Kakubei took off his sweaty clothes
and relaxed in the bath. Then, donning a light kimono, he entered his sitting
room, where Kojirō sat waving a fan.
       The sake was brought in. Kakubei poured, saying, "I called you because
something encouraging happened today that I wanted to tell you about." "Good
news?"
       "Since I mentioned your name to Lord Tadatoshi, he seems to have heard

of you from other sources as well. Today he told me to bring you to see him
sometime soon. As you know, it's not easy to arrange these matters. There are
dozens of retainers with someone they want to suggest." His expectation that
Kojirō would be immensely pleased showed clearly in his tone and manner.
       Kojirō put his cup to his lips and drank. When he did speak, his expression
was unchanged and he said only, "Let me pour you one now."
       Kakubei, far from being put out, admired the young man for being able to
conceal his emotions. "This means I've been successful in carrying out what you
requested of me. I think that calls for a celebration. Have another."
       Kojirō bowed his head slightly and mumbled, "I'm grateful for your
kindness."
       "I was only doing my duty, of course," Kakubei replied modestly. "When a
man is as capable and talented as you, I owe it to my lord to see that you're given
consideration."
       "Please don't overestimate me. And let me reemphasize one point. It's not
the stipend I'm interested in. I simply think the House of Hosokawa is a very
good one for a samurai to serve. It's had three outstanding men in a row." The
three men were Tadatoshi and his father and grandfather, Sansai and Yūsai.
       "You needn't think I've talked you up to the high heavens. I didn't have to.
The name Sasaki Kojirō is known throughout the capital."
       "How could I be famous when all I do is loaf around here all day long? I
don't see that I'm outstanding in any way. It's just that there are so many fakes
around."
      "I was told that I could bring you anytime. When would you like to go?"
      "Any time suits me too."
      "How about tomorrow?"
      "That's all right with me." His face revealed no eagerness, no anxiety, only
      calm self-confidence.
       Kakubei, even more impressed at his sangfroid, chose this time to say
matter-of-factly, "You understand, of course, his lordship won't be able to make a
final decision until he's seen you. You needn't let that worry you. It's only a
matter of form. I have no doubt but what the position will be offered."
       Kojirō set his cup down on the table and stared straight into Kakubei's
face. Then, very coldly and defiantly, he said, "I've changed my mind. Sorry to
have put you to so much trouble." Blood seemed about to burst from his
earlobes, already bright red from the drink.
       "Wh-what?" stammered Kakubei. "You mean you're giving up the chance

for a position with the House of Hosokawa?"
       "I don't like the idea," answered his guest curtly, offering no further
explanation. His pride told him there was no reason for him to submit to an
inspection; dozens of other daimyō would snap him up sight unseen for fifteen
hundred, even twenty-five hundred, bushels.
       Kakubei's puzzled disappointment seemed to make no impression on him
whatsoever, nor did it matter that he would be regarded as a willful ingrate.
Without the least suggestion of doubt or repentance, he finished off his food in
silence and returned to his own quarters.
       The moonlight fell softly on the tatami. Stretching out drunkenly on the
floor, arms under his head, he began to laugh quietly to himself. "Honest man,
that Kakubei. Good, old, honest Kakubei." He knew his host would be at a loss
to explain this sudden shift to Tadatoshi, but he knew also that Kakubei would
not be angry at him for very long, no matter how outrageously he behaved.
       While he had piously denied interest in the stipend, he was in fact
consumed with ambition. He wanted a stipend and much more—every ounce of
fame and success he could possibly achieve. Otherwise, what would be the
purpose of persevering through years of arduous training?
       Kojirō's ambition was different from that of other men only by dint of its
magnitude. He wanted to be known throughout the country as a great and
successful man, to bring glory to his home in Iwakuni, to enjoy every one of the
benefits that can possibly derive from being born human. The quickest road to
fame and riches was to excel in the martial arts. He was fortunate in having a
natural talent for the sword; he knew this and derived no small measure of self-
satisfaction from it. He had planned his course intelligently and with remarkable
foresight. Every action of his was calculated to put him closer to his goal. To his
way of thinking, Kakubei, though his senior, was naive and a little sentimental.
       He fell asleep dreaming of his brilliant future.


       Later, when the moonlight had edged a foot across the tatami, a voice no
louder than the breeze whispering through the bamboo said, "Now." A shadowy
form, crouching among the mosquitoes, crept forward like a frog to the eaves of
the unlighted house.
       The mysterious man seen earlier at the foot of the hill advanced slowly,
silently, until he reached the veranda, where he stopped and peered into the
room. Stooping in the shadows, out of the moonlight, he might have remained

undiscovered indefinitely had he himself made no sound.
       Kojirō snored on. The soft hum of insects, briefly interrupted as the man
moved into position, came again across the dew-covered grass.
       Minutes passed. Then the silence was broken by the clatter the man made
as he whipped out his sword and jumped up onto the veranda.
       He leapt toward Kojirō and cried, "Arrgh!" an instant before he clenched
his teeth and struck.
       There was a sharp hissing as a long black object descended heavily on his
wrist, but the original force of his strike had been powerful. Instead of falling
from his hand, his sword sank into the tatami, where Kojirō's body had been.
       Like a fish darting away from a pole striking water, the intended victim
had streaked to the wall. He now stood facing the intruder, the Drying Pole in
one hand, its scabbard in the other.
       "Who are you?" Kojirō's breathing was calm. Alert as always to the sounds
of nature's creatures, to the falling of a dewdrop, he was unperturbed. "I-it-it's
me!"
       "'Me' doesn't tell me anything. I know you're a coward, attacking a man in
his sleep. What's your name?"
       "I am Yogorō, the only son of Obata Kagenori. You took advantage of my
father when he was sick. And you spread gossip about him all over the city."
      "I wasn't the one who spread the gossip. It was the gossipers—the people of
      Edo."
      "Who was it who lured his students into a fight and killed them?"
      "I did that, no doubt about it. I, Sasaki Kojirō. How can I help it if I'm better
      than they? Stronger. Braver. More knowledgeable in the Art of War."
      "How can you have the gall to say that when you called on Hangawara's
      vermin to help you?"
       With a snarl of disgust, Kojirō took a step forward. "If you want to hate
me, go ahead! But any man who carries a personal grudge into a test of strength
in the Art of War isn't even a coward. He's worse than that, more pitiable, more
laughable. So once again I have to take the life of an Obata man. Are you
resigned to that?"
       No answer.
       "I said, are you resigned to your fate?" He moved another step forward. As
he did so, the light of the moon reflecting off the newly polished blade of his
sword blinded Yogorō.
       Kojirō stared at his prey as a starving man stares at a feast.
