Land of Dreams


       Ieyasu turned the office of shōgun over to Hidetada in 1605 but continued
to govern from his castle in Suruga. Now that the work of laying the foundations
for the new regime was largely completed, he was beginning to let Hidetada take
over his rightful duties.
       When he yielded his authority, Ieyasu had asked his son what he intended
to do.
       Hidetada's reply, "I'm going to build," was said to please the old shōgun
immensely.
       In contrast to Edo, Osaka was still preoccupied with preparations for the
final battle. Illustrious generals laid secret plots, couriers carried messages to
certain fiefs, displaced military leaders and rōnin were provided with solace and
compensation. Ammunition was stockpiled, lances polished, moats deepened.
       And more and more townsmen deserted the western cities for the booming
city in the east, frequently changing loyalties, for the fear lingered that a
Toyotomi victory might mean a reversion to chronic strife.
       To the daimyō and higher-ranking vassals who had yet to decide whether
to entrust the fate of their children and grandchildren to Edo or Osaka, the
impressive construction program in Edo was an argument in favor of the
Tokugawas.
       Today, as on many other days, Hidetada was engaged in one of his favorite
pastimes. Dressed as though for a country outing, he left the main encirclement
and went to the hill at Fukiage to inspect the construction work.
       At about the time the shōgun and his retinue of ministers, personal
attendants and Buddhist priests stopped for a rest, a commotion broke out at the
bottom of Momiji Hill.
       "Stop the son of a bitch!"
       "Catch him!"
       A well digger was running around in circles, trying to shake off the
carpenters who were chasing him. He darted like a hare between stacks of
lumber and hid briefly behind a plasterers' hut. Then he made a dash for the
scaffolding on the outer wall and began climbing.
       Cursing loudly, a couple of the carpenters climbed after him and caught

hold of his feet. The well digger, arms waving frantically, fell back into a pile of
shavings.
       The carpenters fell on him, kicking and beating him from all sides. For
some strange reason, he neither cried out nor attempted to resist, but clung as
tightly as he could to the ground, as if that was his only hope.
      The samurai in charge of the carpenters and the inspector of workmen came
      running up.
      "What's going on here?" asked the samurai.
      "He stepped on my square, the filthy pig!" one carpenter whined. "A square
      is a carpenter's soul!"
      "Get hold of yourself."
      "What would you do if he walked on your sword?" demanded the carpenter.
      "All right, that's enough. The shōgun is resting up there on the hill."
       Hearing the shōgun mentioned, the first carpenter quieted down, but
another man said, "He's got to go wash. Then he's got to bow to the square and
apologize!"
      "We'll take care of the punishment," said the inspector. "You men go back
      to work."
      He seized the prostrate man by the collar and said, "Lift your face." "Yes,
      sir."
      "You're one of the well diggers, aren't you?"
      "Yes, sir."
      "What are you doing down here? This isn't where you work."
      "He was around here yesterday too," said the carpenter.
      "Was he?" said the inspector, staring at Matahachi's pale face and noticing
      that for a well digger he was a little too delicate, a little too refined.
       He conferred with the samurai for a minute, then led Matahachi away.
Matahachi was locked in a woodshed behind the Office of the Inspector of
Workmen and for the next several days had nothing to look at but some
firewood, a sack or two of charcoal and barrels for making pickles. Fearing the
plot would be discovered, he was soon in a state of terror.
       Once inside the castle, he'd reconsidered and decided that if it meant being
a well digger the rest of his life, he wasn't going to become an assassin. He'd
seen the shōgun and his entourage several times and done nothing.
       What took him to the foot of Momiji Hill whenever he could manage it
during his rest periods was an unforeseen complication. A library was to be built,
and when it was, the locust tree would be moved. Matahachi guiltily supposed

the musket would be uncovered and this would link him directly to the plot. But
he hadn't been able to find a time when no one was around to dig up the musket
and throw it away.
        Even when sleeping, he'd break out in a sweat. Once he dreamed he was in
the land of the dead, and wherever he looked there were locust trees. A few
nights after his confinement in the woodshed, in a vision as clear as day, he
dreamed of his mother. Instead of taking pity on him, Osugi shouted angrily and
threw a basketful of cocoons at him. When the cocoons rained down on his head,
he tried to run away. She pursued him, her hair mysteriously transformed into
white cocoons. He ran and ran, but she was always behind him. Bathed in sweat,
he jumped off a cliff and began falling through the darkness of hell, falling
endlessly through blackness.
        "Mother! Forgive me," he cried out like a hurt child, and the sound of his
own voice awakened him. The reality he woke to—the prospect of death—was
more terrifying than the dream.
        He tried the door, which was locked, as he already knew. In desperation he
climbed up a pickle barrel, broke a small window near the roof and squeezed
through. Using piles of lumber and rock and small hills of excavated dirt for
cover, he made his way stealthily to the vicinity of the western rear gate. The
locust tree was still there. He sighed with relief.
        He found a hoe and started digging as if he expected to discover his own
life. Unnerved by the noise he was making, he stopped and looked all around
him. Seeing no one, he began again.
        The fear that someone had already found the musket made him swing the
hoe frantically. His breathing became rapid and uneven. Sweat and grime mixed,
making him look as if he'd just come from a mud bath. He was beginning to get
dizzy, but he could not stop.
        The blade struck something long. Casting the hoe aside, he reached down
to pull it out, thinking: "I've got it."
        His relief was short-lived. The object wasn't wrapped in oil paper, there
was no box, and it wasn't cool like metal. He took hold, held it up and dropped
it. It was a slender white wristbone or shinbone.
        Matahachi did not have the heart to pick up the hoe again. It seemed like
another nightmare. But he knew he was awake; he could count every leaf of the
locust tree.
        "What would Daizō have to gain by lying?" he wondered, as he walked
around the tree, kicking at the dirt.

        He was still circling the tree when a figure walked quietly up behind him
and slapped him lightly on the back. With a loud laugh, right beside Matahachi's
ear, he said, "You won't find it."
        Matahachi's whole body went limp. He almost fell into the hole. Turning
his head toward the voice, he stared blankly for several minutes before uttering a
little croak of astonishment.
        "Come with me," said Takuan, taking him by the hand.
        Matahachi could not move. His fingers went numb, and he clawed at the
        priest's hand. A chill of abject horror spread from his heels upward. "Didn't
you hear? Come with me," said Takuan, scolding with his eyes.
        Matahachi's tongue was almost as useless as a mute's. "Th-this ... fix . . .
        dirt ... I—"
        In a pitiless tone, Takuan said, "Leave it. It's a waste of time. The things
people do on this earth, good or bad, are like ink on porous paper. They cannot
be erased, not in a thousand years. You imagine that kicking a little dirt around
will undo what you've done. It's because you think like that that your life is so
untidy. Now come with me. You're a criminal, your crime heinous. I'm going to
cut off your head with a bamboo saw and cast you into the Pool of Blood in
hell." He seized Matahachi's earlobe and pulled him along.
        Takuan rapped on the door of the shed where the kitchen helpers slept.
"One of you boys come out here," he said.
        A boy came out, rubbing the sleep from his eyes. When he recognized the
priest he'd seen talking with the shōgun, he came awake and said, "Yes, sir. Can I
do something for you?"
       "I want you to open that woodshed."
       "There's a well digger locked up in there."
       "He isn't in there. He's right here. There's no point in putting him back in
       through the window, so open the door."
       The boy hastened to fetch the inspector, who rushed out, apologizing and
       begging Takuan not to report the matter.
        Takuan shoved Matahachi into the shed, went inside and closed the door. A
few minutes later, he poked his head out and said, "You must have a razor
somewhere. Sharpen it and bring it here."
        The inspector and the kitchen helper looked at each other, neither daring to
ask the priest why he wanted the razor. Then they honed the razor and handed it
over to him.
        "Thanks," said Takuan. "Now you can go back to bed."

       The inside of the shed was pitch black, only a glimpse of starlight being
visible through the broken window. Takuan seated himself on a pile of kindling.
Matahachi slumped down on a reed mat, hanging his head in shame. For a long
time there was silence. Unable to see the razor, Matahachi wondered nervously
whether Takuan was holding it in his hand.
       At last Takuan spoke. "Matahachi, what did you dig up under the locust
tree?"
       Silence.
       "I could show you how to dig up something. It would mean extracting
something from nothingness, recovering the real world from a land of dreams."
       "Yes, sir."
       "You haven't the least idea what the reality I'm talking about is. No doubt
you are still in your world of fantasy. Well, since you're as naive as an infant, I
suppose I'll have to chew your intellectual food for you.... How old are you?"
      "Twenty-eight."
      "The same age as Musashi."
      Matahachi put his hands to his face and wept.
       Takuan did not speak until he had cried himself out. Then he said, "Isn't it
frightening to think that the locust tree nearly became the grave marker of a
fool? You were digging your own grave, actually on the verge of putting yourself
into it."
       Matahachi flung his arms around Takuan's legs and pleaded, "Save me.
Please save me. My eyes ... my eyes are open now. I was taken in by Daizō of
Narai."
       "No, your eyes are not open. Nor did Daizō deceive you. He simply tried
to make use of the biggest fool on earth—a greedy, unsophisticated, petty-
minded dolt who nevertheless had the temerity to take on a task any sensible
man would shrink from."
      "Yes ... yes ... I was a fool."
      "Just who did you think this Daizō was?"
      "I don't know."
       "His real name is Mizoguchi Shinano. He was a retainer of Otani
Yoshitsugu, who's a close friend of Ishida Mitsunari. Mitsunari, you will
remember, was one of the losers at Sekigahara."
       "N-no," gasped Matahachi. "He's one of the warriors the shogunate is
trying to track down?"
       "What else would a man out to assassinate the shōgun be? Your stupidity is

appalling."
       "He didn't tell me that. He just said he hated the Tokugawas. He thought
it'd be better for the country if the Toyotomis were in power. He was talking
about working for the sake of everybody."
       "You didn't bother to ask yourself who he really was, did you? Without
once using your head, you went boldly about the business of digging your own
grave. Your kind of courage is frightening, Matahachi."
      "What am I to do?"
      "Do?"
      "Please, Takuan, please, help me!"
      "Let go of me."
      "But ... but I didn't actually use the gun. I didn't even find it!"
       "Of course you didn't. It didn't arrive on time. If Jōtarō, whom Daizō
duped into becoming a part of this dreadful plot, had reached Edo as planned, the
musket might very well have been buried under the tree."
       "Jōtarō? You mean the boy—"
       "Never mind. That doesn't concern you. What does concern you is the
crime of treason, which you have committed and which cannot be pardoned. Nor
can it be condoned by the gods and the Buddha. You may as well stop thinking
about being saved."
      "Isn't there any way ... ?"
      "Certainly not!"
      "Have mercy," sobbed Matahachi, clinging to Takuan's knees.
       Takuan stood up and kicked him away. "Idiot!" he shouted in a voice that
threatened to lift the roof off the shed. The ferocity of his glare was beyond
description—a Buddha refusing to be clung to, a terrifying Buddha unwilling to
save eyen the penitent.
       For a second or two, Matahachi met the look resentfully. Then his head
dropped in resignation, and his body was racked with sobs.
       Takuan took the razor from the top of the woodpile and touched
Matahachi's head with it lightly.
       "As long as you're going to die, you may as well die looking like a disciple
of the Buddha. Out of friendship, I'll help you do that. Close your eyes and sit
quietly with your legs crossed. The line between life and death is not thicker
than an eyelid. There is nothing frightening about death, nothing to cry over.
Don't weep, child, don't weep. Takuan will prepare you for the end."

       The room where the shōgun's Council of Elders met to discuss matters of
state was isolated from other parts of Edo Castle. This secret chamber was
completely enclosed by other rooms and hallways. Whenever it was necessary to
receive a decision from the shōgun, the ministers would either go to his audience
chamber or send a petition in a lacquered box. Notes and replies had been going
back and forth with unusual frequency, and Takuan and Lord Hōjō had been
admitted to the room several times, often remaining there for day-long
deliberations.
       On this particular day, in another room, less isolated but no less well
guarded, the ministers had heard the report of the envoy sent to Kiso.
       He said that though there had been no delay in acting on the order for
Daizō's arrest, Daizō had escaped after closing up his establishment in Narai,
taking his entire household with him. A search had brought to light a substantial
supply of arms and ammunition, together with a few documents that had escaped
destruction. The papers included letters to and from Toyotomi supporters in
Osaka. The envoy had arranged for shipment of the evidence to the shōgun's
capital and then rushed back to Edo by fast horse.
       The ministers felt like fishermen who had cast a big net and not caught so
much as a single minnow.
       The very next day, a retainer of Lord Sakai, who was a member of the
Council of Elders, made a report of a different sort: "In accordance with your
lordship's instructions, Miyamoto Musashi has been released from prison. He
was handed over to a man named Musō Gonnosuke, to whom we explained in
detail how the misunderstanding came about."
       Lord Sakai promptly informed Takuan, who said lightly, "Very good of
you."
       "Please ask your friend Musashi not to think too badly of us," said Lord
Sakai apologetically, uncomfortably aware of the error made in the territory
under his jurisdiction.
       One of the problems solved most quickly was that of Daizō's base of
operations in Edo. Officials under the Commissioner of Edo descended on the
pawnshop in Shibaura and in one swift move confiscated everything, both
property and secret documents. In the process, the unlucky Akemi was taken into
custody, though she was completely in the dark regarding her patron's
treacherous plans.
       Received in audience by the shōgun one evening, Takuan related events as

he knew them and told him how everything had turned out. He ended by saying,
"Please do not forget for a moment that there are many more Daizōs of Narai in
this world."
       Hidetada accepted the warning with a vigorous nod.
       "If you attempt to search out all such men and bring them to justice,"
Takuan continued, "all your time and effort will be consumed in coping with
insurgents. You won't be able to carry out the great work expected of you as your
father's successor."
       The shōgun perceived the troth of Takuan's words and took them to heart.
"Let the punishments be light," he directed. "Since you reported the conspiracy, I
leave it to you to decide the penalties."
       After expressing his heartfelt thanks, Takuan said, "Quite without
intending to, I see I've been here at the castle for more than a month. It's time to
leave now. I'll go to Koyagyū in Yamato to visit Lord Sekishūsai. Then I'll return
to the Daitokuji, traveling by way of the Senshū district."
       Mention of Sekishūsai seemed to evoke a pleasant memory for Hidetada.
"How is old Yagyū's health?" he asked.
       "Unfortunately, I'm told that Lord Munenori thinks the end is near."
       Hidetada recalled a time when he had been at the Shōkokuji encampment
and Sekishūsai had been received by Ieyasu. Hidetada had been a child at the
time, and Sekishūsai's manly bearing had made a deep impression on him.
       Takuan broke the silence. "There is one other matter," he said. "In
consultation with the Council of Elders and with their permission, Lord Hōjō of
Awa and I have recommended a samurai by the name of Miyamoto Musashi to
be a tutor in your excellency's household. I hope that you will look favorably
upon this recommendation."
       "I've been informed of that. It's said that the House of Hosokawa is
interested in him, which is very much to his favor. I have decided it would be all
right to appoint one more tutor."


      It was a day or two before Takuan left the castle, and in the time he
acquired a new disciple. Going to the woodshed behind the inspector's office, he
had one of the kitchen helpers open the door for him, letting the light fall on a
freshly shaven head.
      Temporarily blinded, the novice, who thought himself a condemned man,
slowly lifted his downcast eyes and said, "Ah!"

        "Come," said Takuan.
        Wearing the priest's robe Takuan had sent him, Matahachi stood up
unsteadily on legs that felt as if they had begun to decay. Takuan gently put his
arm around him and helped him out of the shed.
        The day of retribution had arrived. Behind his eyelids, closed in
resignation, Matahachi could see the reed mat on which he would be forced to
kneel before the executioner raised his sword. Apparently he had forgotten that
traitors faced an ignominious death by hanging. Tears trickled down his clean-
shaven cheeks.
        "Can you walk?" asked Takuan.
        Matahachi thought he was replying; in fact, no sound came out. He was
barely conscious of going through the castle gates and crossing the bridges
spanning the inner and outer moats. Trudging along dolefully beside Takuan, he
was the perfect image of the proverbial sheep being led to slaughter. "Hail to the
Buddha Amida, hail to the Buddha Amida...." Silently he repeated the invocation
to the Buddha of Eternal Light.
        Matahachi squinted and looked beyond the outer moat at stately daimyō
mansions. Farther to the east lay Hibiya Village; beyond, the streets of the
downtown district were visible.
        The floating world called out to him anew, and along with his yearning for
it, fresh tears came to his eyes. He closed them and rapidly repeated, "Hail to the
Buddha Amida, hail to the Buddha Amida...." The supplication became first
audible, then louder and louder, faster and faster.
        "Hurry up," Takuan said sternly.
        From the moat, they turned toward Ōtemachi and cut diagonally across a
large vacant lot. Matahachi felt he had walked a thousand miles already. Would
the road simply go on like this all the way to hell, daylight gradually giving way
to utter darkness?
        "Wait here," commanded Takuan. They were in the middle of a flat open
area; to the left, muddy water came down the moat from Tokiwa Bridge.
        Directly across the street was an earthen wall, only recently covered with
white plaster. Beyond this was the stockade of the new prison and a group of
black buildings, which looked like ordinary town houses but was actually the
official residence of the Commissioner of Edo.
        His legs quaking, Matahachi could no longer support himself. He plopped
down on the ground. Somewhere in the grass, the cry of a quail suggested the
pathway to the land of the dead.

       Run for it? His feet were not bound, nor were his hands. But no, he
thought, he couldn't get away with it. If the shōgun decided he was worth
finding, there would not be a leaf, a blade of grass, to hide behind.
       In his heart, he cried out to his mother, who at this moment seemed very
dear to him. If only he had never left her side, he wouldn't be here now. He
recalled other women too: Okō, Akemi, Otsū, others he had been fond of or
dallied with. But his mother was the only woman he genuinely longed to see. If
only he were given the opportunity to go on living, he was certain he would
never again go against her will, never again be an unfilial son.
       He felt a damp chill on the back of his neck. He looked up at three wild
geese winging their way toward the bay and envied them.
       The urge to take flight was like an itch. And why not? He had nothing to
lose. If he were caught, he would be no worse off than he was now. With a
desperate look in his eyes, he glanced toward the gate across the street. No sign
of Takuan.
       He jumped up and started to run.
       "Stop!"
       The loud voice alone was enough to break his spirit. He looked around and
saw one of the commissioner's executioners. The man stepped forward and
brought his long staff down on Matahachi's shoulder, felling him with one blow,
then pinned him down with the staff, as a child might pin down a frog with a
stick.
       When Takuan came out of the commissioner's residence, he was
accompanied by several guards, including a captain. They led out another
prisoner, who was tied up with a rope.
       The captain selected the place where the punishment would be carried out,
and two freshly woven reed mats were spread on the ground.
       "Shall we get on with it?" he asked Takuan, who nodded his assent.
       As captain and priest sat down on stools to watch, the executioner shouted,
"Stand up!" and lifted his staff. Matahachi dragged himself to his feet but was
too weak to walk. The executioner seized him angrily by the back of his robe
and half dragged him to one of the mats.
       He sat. His head dropped. He could no longer hear the quail. Though he
was conscious of voices, they sounded indistinct, as though separated from him
by a wall.
      Hearing his name whispered, he looked up in surprise.
      "Akemi!" he gasped. "What are you doing here?"

     She was kneeling on the other mat.
     "No talking!" Two of the guards made use of their staffs to separate them.
      The captain stood up and began reading the official judgments and
sentences in stern, dignified tones. Akemi held back her tears, but Matahachi
wept shamelessly. The captain finished, sat down and shouted, "Strike."
      Two low-ranking guards carrying long switches of split bamboo pranced
into position and began systematically lashing the prisoners across the back.
     "One. Two. Three," they counted.
     Matahachi moaned. Akemi, head bowed and face ashen, clamped her teeth
     together with all her might in an effort to bear the pain.
     "Seven. Eight. Nine." The switches frayed; smoke seemed to rise from their
     tips.
     A few passersby stopped at the edge of the lot to watch.
     "What's going on?"
     "Two prisoners being punished, it looks like."
     "A hundred lashes, probably."
     "They're not even to fifty yet."
     "Must hurt."
      A guard approached and startled them by thumping the ground sharply
with his staff. "Off with you. You're not allowed to stand here."
      The gawkers moved to a safer distance and, looking back, saw that the
punishment was over. The guards discarded their switches, which were now only
bundles of flabby strands, and wiped the sweat off their faces.
      Takuan stood up. The captain was already on his feet. They exchanged
amenities, and the captain led his men back toward the commissioner's
compound. Takuan stood still for several minutes, looking at the bowed figures
on the mats. He said nothing before walking away.
      The shōgun had bestowed a number of gifts on him; these he had donated
to various Zen temples in the city. Yet the gossips of Edo were soon at it again.
According to which rumor one heard, he was an ambitious priest who meddled
in politics. Or one the Tokugawas had persuaded to spy on the Osaka faction. Or
a "black-robed" conspirator.
      The rumors meant nothing to Takuan. Though he cared very much about
the welfare of the nation, it made little difference to him whether the gaudy
flowers of the time—the castles at Edo and Osaka—blossomed or fell.
      A few thin rays of sunlight filtered through the clouds; the voice of the
quail was audible again. Neither of the forms moved for quite some time, though

neither had completely lost consciousness.
      Finally Akemi mumbled, "Matahachi, look—water." Before them were
two wooden pails of water, each with a dipper, placed there as evidence that the
Office of the Commissioner was not entirely heartless.
      After gulping down several mouthfuls, Akemi offered the dipper to
Matahachi. When he failed to respond, she asked, "What's the matter? Don't you
want any?"
     Slowly he reached out and took the dipper. Once it touched his lips, he
     drank ravenously.
     "Matahachi, have you become a priest?"
     "Huh? ... Is that all?"
     "Is what all?"
     "Is the punishment over? They haven't cut off our heads yet."
     "They weren't supposed to. Didn't you hear the man read the sentences?"
     "What did he say?"
     "He said we were to be banished from Edo."
      "I'm alive!" he shrieked. Almost insane with joy, he jumped up and walked
away without so much as a backward glance at Akemi.
      She put her hands to her head and began to fuss with her hair. Then she
adjusted her kimono and tightened her obi. "Shameless," she muttered through
crooked lips. Matahachi was only a speck on the horizon.
