The Locust Tree


      Matahachi opened his eyes and looked around, got up and poked his head
      out the back door.
      "Akemi!" he called.
      There was no answer.
      Something prompted him to open the closet. She had recently finished
      making a new kimono. It was gone.
       Going next door first, to Umpei's, he then walked through the alley toward
the street, anxiously asking everyone he met if they'd seen her.
      "I saw her this morning," said the charcoal vendor's wife.
      "You did? Where?"
      "She was all dressed up. I asked her where she was off to, and she said to
      see relatives in Shinagawa."
      "Shinagawa?"
      "Doesn't she have relatives there?" she asked skeptically.
      He started to say no, but caught himself. "Uh, yes, of course. That's where
      she's gone."
       Run after her? In truth, his attachment to her was not particularly strong,
and he was more annoyed than anything else. Her disappearance left a
bittersweet taste.
       He spat and gave vent to an oath or two, then strolled down to the beach,
just on the other side of the Shibaura highroad. A little back from the water stood
a scattering of fishermen's houses. It was his habit to come here every morning
while Akemi was cooking rice and look for fish. Usually at least five or six had
fallen from the nets, and he would return just in time to have them cooked for
breakfast. Today he ignored the fish.
      "What's the matter, Matahachi?" The pawnbroker from the main street
      tapped him on the shoulder.
      "Good morning," said Matahachi.
      "It's nice to be out early, isn't it? I'm glad to see you come out for a walk
      every morning. Great for your health!"
      "You're joking, I suppose. Maybe if I was rich like you, I'd be walking for
      my health. For me, walking's work."

       "You don't look too well. Something happen?"
        Matahachi picked up a handful of sand and cast it bit by bit into the wind.
Both he and Akemi were well acquainted with the pawnbroker, who had tided
them over several emergencies.
        Undaunted, the man continued: "You know, there's something I've been
meaning to talk to you about, but I never seem to have the chance. Are you
going out to work today?"
       "Why bother? It's not much of a living, selling watermelons."
       "Come fishing with me."
       Matahachi scratched his head and looked apologetic. "Thanks, but I really
       don't like to fish."
        "Well, you don't have to fish if you don't want to. But come along anyway.
It'll make you feel better. That's my boat over there. You can scull a boat, can't
you?"
       "I guess so."
       "Come along. I'm going to tell you how to make a lot of money—maybe a
       thousand pieces of gold. How would you like that?"
       Suddenly Matahachi had a great interest in going fishing.
        About a thousand yards offshore, the water was still shallow enough to
touch bottom with the scull. Letting the boat drift, Matahachi asked, "Just how
do I go about making this money?"
        "I'll tell you soon enough." The pawnbroker readjusted his bulky frame on
the seat at the waist of the boat. "I'd appreciate it if you'd hold a fishing pole out
over the water."
       "Why?"
       "It's better if people think we're fishing. Two people rowing out this far just
       to talk would look suspicious."
       "How's this?"
        "Fine." He took out a pipe with a ceramic bowl, packed it with expensive
tobacco and lit it. "Before I tell you what I have in mind, let me ask you a
question. What do your neighbors say about me?"
        "About you?"
        "Yes, about Daizō of Narai."
        "Well, pawnbrokers are supposed to be skinflints, but everybody says
you're very good about lending money. They say you're a man who understands
life."
       "I don't mean my business practices. I want to know their opinion of me

     personally."
     "They think you're a good man, a man with a heart. I'm not just flattering
     you. That's really what they say."
     "Don't they ever comment on what a religious man I am?"
     "Oh, yes, of course. Everybody's amazed at how charitable you are."
     "Have men from the magistrate's office ever come around inquiring about
     me?"
     "No. Why should they?"
      Daizō gave a little laugh. "I suppose you think my questions are foolish,
but the truth of the matter is that I'm not really a pawnbroker."
     "What?"
     "Matahachi, you may never have another chance to make so much money
     all at once."
     "You're probably right."
     "Do you want to catch hold?"
     "Of what?"
     "The money vine."
     "Wh-what do I have to do?"
     "Make a promise to me and carry it out."
     "That's all?"
      "That's all, but if you change your mind later, you're as good as dead. I
know the money interests you, but think hard before you give your final answer."
     "Just what do I have to do?" Matahachi asked suspiciously.
     "You have to become a well digger. There's nothing to it."
     "At Edo Castle?"
      Daizō gazed out over the bay. Cargo boats loaded with building materials
and bearing the flags of several great clans—Tōdō, Arima, Katō, Date,
Hosokawa—were lined up almost prow to stern.
      "You catch on quick, Matahachi." The pawnbroker refilled his pipe. "Edo
Castle is precisely what I have in mind. If I'm not mistaken, Umpei's been trying
to persuade you to dig wells for him. It'd be perfectly natural for you to decide to
take him up on the offer."
      "That's all I have to do? ... How is becoming a well digger going to bring
me that much money?"
      "Be patient. I'll tell you all about it."

       When they returned to shore, Matahachi was euphoric. They parted with a
promise. That evening he was to slip away unobserved and go to Daizō's house
to receive an advance payment of thirty pieces of gold.
       He went home, took a nap and awoke a few hours later with the image of
the vast sum that would soon be his dancing before his eyes.
       Money, a fantastic amount, enough to compensate for all the bad luck he
had had up till then. Enough to last him for the rest of his life. Even more
exciting was the prospect of being able to show people that they were wrong,
that he had what it took after all.
       With the money fever upon him, he could not calm down. His mouth still
felt dry, even a little numb. Going outside, he stood in the deserted alleyway
facing the bamboo grove behind the house and thought: "Who is he, anyway?
Just what is he up to?" Then he began to go over the conversation with Daizō.
The well diggers were presently working at the Goshinjō, the new castle in the
western encirclement. Daizō had told him, "You're to bide your time until the
chance presents itself, and then you're to shoot the new shōgun with a musket."
The gun and ammunition would be on the castle grounds, under a huge,
centuries-old locust tree near the back gate at the bottom of Momiji Hill.
       Needless to say, the laborers were under close surveillance, but Hidetada
liked going around with his attendants to inspect the work. It would be simple
enough to accomplish the objective. In the ensuing uproar, Matahachi could
escape by jumping into the outer moat, from which Daizō's accomplices would
rescue him—"without fail," he had said.
       Back in his room, Matahachi stared at the ceiling. He seemed to hear
Daizō's voice whispering certain words over and over and recalled how his own
lips had trembled when he'd said, "Yes, I'll do it." His skin covered with goose
pimples, he jumped to his feet. "This is awful! I'm going over there right now
and tell him I don't want any part of it."
       Then he remembered something else Daizō had said: "Now that I've told
you all this, you're committed. I'd hate to see anything happen to you, but if you
try to back out, my friends will have your head within—oh, three days at the
outside." Daizō's piercing stare as he had said this flashed before Matahachi's
eyes.
       Matahachi walked the short distance down Nishikubo Lane to the corner
of the Takanawa highroad, where the pawnshop stood. The bay, cloaked in
darkness, was at the end of a side street. He entered the alley alongside the
familiar storehouse, went to the inconspicuous back door of the shop and

knocked softly.
      "It's not locked," came the immediate response.
      "Daizō?"
      "Yes. Glad you came. Let's go into the storehouse."
      A rain shutter had been left open. Matahachi went into the outer corridor
      and followed the pawnbroker.
       "Sit down," said Daizō, placing a candle on a long wooden clothes chest.
Sitting down himself and crossing his arms, he asked, "Did you see Umpei?"
"Yes."
      "When will he take you to the castle?"
      "The day after tomorrow, when he has to bring ten new laborers. He said
      he'd include me."
      "Then everything's set?"
       "Well, we still have to get the district headman and the five-man
neighborhood association to put their seals on the documents."
       "No problem. It so happens I'm a member of the association."
       "Really? You?"
       "What's so surprising about that? I'm one of the more influential
businessmen in the neighborhood. Last spring, the headman insisted I join."
       "Oh, I wasn't surprised. I ... I just didn't know, that's all."
       "Ha, ha. I know exactly what you thought. You thought it was scandalous
for a man like me to be on the committee that looks after neighborhood affairs.
Well, let me tell you, if you have money, everybody'll say you're a fine man. You
can't avoid becoming a local leader even if you try. Think, Matahachi. Before
long you're going to have lots of money too."
       "Y-y-yes," stammered Matahachi, unable to suppress a shiver. "W-w-will
you give me the advance now?"
       "Wait a minute."
       Picking up the candle, he went to the rear of the storehouse. From a casket
on the shelf, he counted out thirty pieces of gold. He came back and said, "Do
you have anything to wrap them in?"
       "No."
       "Use this." He snatched a cotton rag from the floor and threw it to
Matahachi. "You'd better put it in your stomach wrapper and make sure it's done
up tight."
       "Should I give you a receipt?"
       "Receipt?" echoed Daizō with an involuntary laugh. "My, aren't you the

honest one! But no, I don't need one. If you make a mistake, I'll confiscate your
head."
       Matahachi blinked and said, "I suppose I'd better be going now."
       "Not so fast. Some obligations go with that money. Do you remember
everything I told you this morning?"
       "Yes. Well, there is one thing. You said the musket would be under the
locust tree. Who's going to put it there?" Considering how difficult it was for
ordinary workers to enter the castle grounds, he wondered how anyone could
possibly manage to sneak in a musket and ammunition. And how could anyone
without supernatural powers bury them so they'd be ready and waiting half a
month from now?
       "That doesn't concern you. You just do what you've agreed to do. You're
nervous now because you're not used to the idea. After you've been there a
couple of weeks, you'll be all right."
       "I hope so."
       "First you have to make up your mind you're going through with it. Then
you have to be on the lookout for the right moment."
       "I understand."
       "Now, I don't want any slipups. Hide that money where no one can find it.
And leave it there until after you've carried out your mission. When projects like
this fall through, it's always because of money."
       "Don't worry. I've thought about that already. But let me ask you this: How
can I be sure that after I've done my job you won't refuse to pay me the rest?"
       "Hmph! It may seem like bragging, but money's the least of my worries.
Feast your eyes on those boxes." He held the candle up so Matahachi could see
better. All over the room were boxes—for lacquered trays, for armor, for many
other purposes. "Every one of them contains a thousand pieces of gold."
       Without looking very closely, Matahachi said apologetically, "I don't doubt
your word, of course."
       The secret conversation went on for another hour or so. Matahachi, feeling
somewhat more confident, left by the back way.
       Daizō went to a nearby room and looked in. "Akemi, are you there?" he
called. "I think he'll go straight from here to hide the money. You'd better follow
him."
       After a few visits to the pawnshop, Akemi, enthralled with Daizō's
personality, had unburdened herself, complaining about her present
circumstances and expressing her desire to move on to something better. A

couple of days earlier, Daizō had remarked that he was in need of a woman to
run his house. Akemi had shown up at his door very early this morning. When
he'd let her in, he'd told her not to worry, he'd "take care of" Matahachi.
       The prospective assassin, serenely unaware he was being followed,
returned home. Hoe in hand, he then climbed through the dark grove behind the
house to the top of Nishikubo Hill and buried his treasure.
       Having observed all this, Akemi reported to Daizō, who immediately set
out for Nishikubo Hill. It was almost dawn when he returned to the storehouse
and counted the gold pieces he had dug up. He counted them a second time, and
a third, but there was no mistake. Only twenty-eight.
       Daizō cocked his head and frowned. He profoundly disliked people who
stole his money.
