Brother Disciples


       "Come now, no more tears." Gonnosuke hugged Iori to his chest. "You're a
man, aren't you?"
       "It's because I'm a man ... that I'm crying." He lifted his head, opened his
mouth wide and bawled at the sky.
       "They didn't arrest Musashi. He gave himself up." Gonnosuke's mild
words masked his own deep concern. "Come on, let's go now."
       "No! Not until they bring him back."
       "They'll let him go soon. They'll have to. Do you want me to leave you
here by yourself?" Gonnosuke walked a few paces away.
     Iori didn't move. Just then, Baiken's dog came charging out of the woods,
     his muzzle a dull, bloody red.
     "Help!" screamed Iori, running to Gonnosuke's side.
     "You're worn out, aren't you? Look, would you like me to carry you
     piggyback?"
     Iori, pleased, mumbled his thanks, climbed on the proffered back and
     wrapped his arms around the broad shoulders.
       With the festival over the night before, the visitors had departed. A gentle
breeze wafted bits of bamboo wrapping and scraps of paper along the deserted
streets.
       Passing the Oinu Teahouse, Gonnosuke glanced inside, intending to go by
unnoticed.
       But Iori piped out, "There's the woman who ran away!"
       "I imagine that's where she'd be." He stopped and wondered aloud, "If the
officials dragged in Musashi, why didn't they arrest her too?"
     When Okō saw Gonnosuke, her eyes blazed with anger.
     Seeing she seemed to be hurriedly gathering her belongings together,
     Gonnosuke laughed. "Going on a trip?" he asked.
     "None of your business. Don't think I don't know you, you meddling
     scoundrel. You killed my husband!"
     "You brought it on yourselves."
     "I'll get even one of these days."
     "She-demon!" Iori shouted over Gonnosuke's head.

       Retreating into the back room, Okō laughed scornfully. "You're fine ones
to be saying bad things about me when you're the thieves who broke into the
treasure house."
       "What's this?" Gonnosuke let Iori slide to the ground and went into the
teahouse. "Who are you calling thieves?"
       "You can't fool me."
       "Say that again, and—"
       "Thieves!"
       As Gonnosuke grabbed her arm, she turned and stabbed at him with a
dagger. Not bothering with his staff, he wrested the dagger from her hand and
sent her sprawling through the front door.
       Okō jumped up and screamed, "Help! Thieves! I'm being attacked."
Gonnosuke took aim and hurled the dagger. It entered her back and the point
came out in front. Okō pitched forward onto her face.
       From nowhere, Kuro bounded forth and was at the body, first slurping
blood hungrily, then lifting his head to howl at the sky.
       "Look at those eyes!" exclaimed Iori in horror.
       Okō's cry of "Thieves!" had caught the ears of the excited villagers.
Sometime before dawn, someone had broken into the temple treasure house. It
was clearly the work of outsiders, for the religious treasures—old swords,
mirrors and the like—had been left untouched, but a fortune in gold dust, bullion
and cash, accumulated over a period of many years, was missing. The news had
leaked out slowly and was still unconfirmed. The effect of Okō's scream, the
most tangible proof so far, was electric.
       "There they are!"
       "Inside the Oinu!"
       The cries attracted a still larger mob, armed with bamboo spears, boar
guns, sticks and rocks. In no time it seemed that the whole village was
surrounding the teahouse, thirsty for blood.
       Gonnosuke and Iori ducked out the back and for the next several hours
were driven from hiding place to hiding place. But now they had an explanation:
Musashi had been arrested not for the "crime" he was about to confess but as a
thief. It was not until they reached Shōmaru Pass that they shook off the last of
the search parties.
      "You can see Musashino Plain from here," said Iori. "I wonder if my
      teacher's all right."
      "Hmm. I imagine he's in prison by now and being questioned." "Isn't there

      any way to save him?"
      "There must be."
      "Please do something. Please."
       "You don't have to beg. He's like a teacher to me too. But, Iori, there's not
much you can do here. Can you make it back home by yourself?"
      "I suppose so, if I have to."
      "Good."
      "What about you?"
       "I'm going back to Chichibu. If they refuse to release Musashi, I'll get him
out some way. Even if I have to tear the prison down." For emphasis, he
thumped the ground once with his staff. Iori, who had seen the power of this
weapon, quickly nodded his agreement. "That's a boy. You go back and watch
over things until I bring Musashi home safe and sound." Placing his staff under
his arm, he turned back toward Chichibu.
       Iori didn't feel lonely or afraid, nor did he worry about getting lost. But he
was dreadfully sleepy, and as he walked along under the warm sun, he could
hardly keep his eyes open. At Sakamoto, he saw a stone Buddha by the wayside
and lay down in its shadow.
       The evening light was fading when he awoke and heard soft voices on the
other side of the statue. Feeling rather guilty about eavesdropping, he pretended
he was still asleep.
       There were two of them, one sitting on a tree stump, the other on a rock.
Tied to a tree a little distance away were two horses with lacquered boxes
suspended from both sides of their saddles. A wooden tag attached to one of the
boxes said: "From Shimotsuke Province. For use in the construction of the west
encirclement. Lacquerware Supplier to the Shōgun."
       To Iori, who now peeked around the statue, they did not look like the
normal run of well-fed castle officials. Their eyes were too sharp, their bodies
too muscular. The older one was a vigorous-looking man of more than fifty. The
last rays of the sun reflected strongly from his bonnetlike hat, which came down
over both ears and projected out in front, concealing his features.
       His companion was a slender, wiry youth wearing a forelock that suited his
boyish face. His head was covered with a Suō-dyed hand towel, tied beneath his
chin.
       "How about the lacquerware boxes?" the younger one asked. "That was
pretty good, wasn't it?"
       "Yes, that was clever, making people think we're connected with the work

going on at the castle. I wouldn't have thought of that myself."
      "I'll have to teach you these things little by little."
      "Careful now. Don't start making fun of your elders. But who knows?
Maybe in four or five years, old Daizō will be taking orders from you."
      "Well, young people do grow up. Old people just get older, no matter how
hard they work at staying young."
      "Do you think that's what I'm doing?"
      "It's obvious, isn't it? You're always thinking of your age, and that's what
makes you so devoted to seeing your mission accomplished."
     "You know me pretty well, I guess."
     "Shouldn't we be going?"
     "Yes; night's catching up with us."
     "I don't like the idea of being caught up with."
     "Ha, ha. If you scare easily, you can't have much confidence in what you're
     doing."
     "I haven't been at this business very long. Even the sound of the wind
     makes me nervous sometimes."
      "That's because you still think of yourself as an ordinary thief. If you keep
in mind that you're doing it for the good of the country, you'll be all right."
      "You always say that. I believe you, but something keeps telling me I'm
not doing the right thing."
      "You have to have the courage of your convictions." But the admonition
sounded slightly unconvincing, as though Daizō was reassuring himself.
      The youth jumped lightly into the saddle and rode on ahead. "Keep your
eye on me," he called back over his shoulder. "If I see anything, I'll signal."
      The road made a long descent to the south. Iori watched from behind the
stone Buddha for a minute, then decided to follow them. Somehow the idea had
formed in his mind that these were the treasure house thieves.
      Once or twice they looked back cautiously. Apparently finding nothing to
warrant alarm, they seemed to forget about him after a time. Before long, the
evening glow was gone, and it was too dark to see more than a few yards ahead.
      The two riders were almost at the edge of Musashino Plain when the youth
pointed and said, "There, Chief, you can see the lights of Ogimachiya." The road
was flattening out. A short distance ahead, the Iruma River, twisting like a
discarded obi, shone silvery in the moonlight.
      Iori was now being careful to remain inconspicuous. His idea that these
men were the thieves had become a conviction, and he knew all about bandits

from his days in Hōtengahara. Bandits were vicious men who would commit
mayhem over a single egg or a handful of red beans. Unprovoked murder was
nothing to them.
        By and by, they entered the town of Ogimachiya. Daizō lifted his arm and
said, "Jōta, we'll stop here and have a bite to eat. The horses have to be fed, and
I'd like a smoke."
        They tied the horses in front of a dimly lit shop and went inside. Jōta
stationed himself by the door, keeping his eyes on the boxes the whole time he
was eating. When he was finished, he went out and fed the horses.
        Iori went into a food shop across the street, and when the two men rode
off, he grabbed the last handful of his rice and ate it as he walked.
       They rode side by side now; the road was dark but level.
       "Jōta, did you send a courier to Kiso?"
       "Yes, I took care of that."
       "What time did you tell them?"
       "Midnight. We should be there on schedule."
        In the still night, Iori caught enough of their conversation to know that
Daizō called his companion by a boy's name, while Jōta addressed the older man
as "Chief." This might mean nothing more than that he was the head of a gang,
but somehow Iori got the impression they were father and son. This made them
not mere bandits but hereditary bandits, very dangerous men he would never be
able to capture by himself. But if he could stick with them long enough, he could
report their whereabouts to the officials.
        The town of Kawagoe was fast asleep, as soundless as a swamp in the
dead of night. Having passed rows of darkened houses, the two riders turned off
the highway and began climbing a hill. A stone marker at the bottom said:
"Forest of the Head-burying Mound—Above."
        Climbing up through the bushes alongside the path, Iori reached the top
first. There was a lone pine tree of great size, to which a horse was tied.
Squatting at the base were three men dressed like rōnin, arms folded on their
knees, looking expectantly toward the path.
        Iori had hardly ensconced himself in a hiding place before one of the men
stood up and said, "It's Daizō, all right." All three ran forward and exchanged
jovial salutations. Daizō and his confederates had not met for nearly four years.
        Before long, they got down to work. Under Daizō's direction, they rolled a
huge stone aside and began digging. Dirt was piled to one side, a great store of
gold and silver to the other. Jōta unloaded the boxes from the horses and dumped

out their contents, which, as Iori had suspected, consisted of the missing treasure
from Mitsumine Shrine. Added to the previous cache, the total booty must have
had a value of many tens of thousands of ryō.
      The precious metals were poured into plain straw sacks and loaded on
three horses. The empty lacquered boxes, along with other objects that had
served their purpose, were dumped into the hole. After the ground had been
smoothed over, the stone was restored to its original position.
      "That should do it," said Daizō. "Time for a smoke." He sat down by the
pine tree and took out his pipe. The others brushed off their clothes and joined
him.
      During the four years of his so-called pilgrimage, Daizō had covered the
Kantō Plain very thoroughly. There were few temples or shrines without a
plaque attesting to his generosity, the extent of which was no secret. Strangely,
though, no one had thought to ask how he had come by all this money.
      Daizō, Jōtarō and the three men from Kiso sat in a circle for about an hour,
discussing future plans. That it was now risky for Daizō to return to Edo was not
in doubt, but one of them had to go. There was gold in the storehouse at
Shibaura to be recovered and documents to be burned. And something had to be
done about Akemi.
      Just before sunup, Daizō and the three men began the journey down the
Kōshū highroad to Kiso. Jōtarō, on foot, set off in the opposite direction.
      The stars Iori was gazing at offered no answer to his question: "Who to
follow?"


        Under the transparently blue autumn sky, the strong rays of the afternoon
sun seemed to sink right into Jōtarō's skin. His head filled with thoughts of his
role in the coming age, he was strolling across the Musashino Plain as though he
owned it.
        Casting a somewhat apprehensive glance behind him, he thought: "He's
still there." Thinking the boy might want to talk to him, he'd already stopped a
couple of times, but the boy had made no attempt to catch up with him.
       Deciding to find out what was going on, Jōtarō chose a clump of eulalia and
       hid in it.
       When Iori reached the stretch of road where he'd last seen Jōtarō, he began
       looking around worriedly.
       Abruptly Jōtarō stood up and called out, "You there, runt!"

       Iori gasped but recovered quickly. Knowing he couldn't get away, he
walked on past and asked nonchalantly, "What do you want?"
      "You've been following me, haven't you?"
      "Unh-unh." Iori shook his head innocently. "I'm on my way to Jūnisō
      Nakano."
      "You're lying! You were following me."
       "I don't know what you're talking about." Iori started to break and run, but
Jōtarō caught him by the back of his kimono.
      "Out with it!"
      "But ... I ... I don't know anything."
      "Liar!" said Jōtarō, tightening his grip. "Somebody sent you after me.
      You're a spy!"
      "And you—you're a lousy thief!"
      "What?" Jōtarō shouted, his face almost touching Iori's.
      Iori bent nearly to the ground, broke loose and took off.
      Jōtarō hesitated a minute, then set off after him.
       Off to one side, Iori could see thatched roofs scattered about like wasp
nests. He ran through a field of reddish autumn grass, kicking apart several dusty
molehills.
       "Help! Help! Thief!" cried Iori.
       The small village he was entering was inhabited by families charged with
fighting fires on the plain. Iori could hear a blacksmith's hammer and anvil.
People came running out of dark stables and houses where persimmons had been
hung to dry. Waving his arms, Iori panted, "The man with the bandanna ...
chasing me ... is a thief. Capture him. Please! ... Oh, oh! Here he comes."
       The villagers stared in bewilderment, some looking fearfully at the two
youths, but to Iori's dismay they made no move to capture Jōtarō.
       "He's a thief! He stole from the temple!"
       He stopped halfway through the village, conscious that the only thing
disturbing the peaceful atmosphere was his own shouting. Then he took to his
heels again and found a place to hide and catch his breath.
       Jōtarō cautiously slowed down to a dignified walk. The villagers watched
in silence. He certainly didn't look like either a robber or a rōnin up to no good;
in fact, he seemed like a clean-cut youth incapable of committing any kind of
crime.
       Disgusted that the villagers—grownups!—wouldn't stand up to a thief, Iori
made up his mind to hurry back to Nakano, where he could at least present his

case to people he knew.
       He left the road and struck out across the plain. When he could see the
cryptomeria grove behind the house, there was only a mile to go. Filled with
relief, he changed his pace, from a trot to a full run.
       Suddenly he saw that his way was blocked by a man with both arms
outstretched.
       He didn't have time to figure out how Jōtarō had got ahead of him, but he
was on home ground now. He jumped back and drew his sword.
      "You bastard," he screamed.
      Jōtarō rushed forward empty-handed and caught Iori's collar, but the boy
      pulled free and jumped ten feet to the side.
      "Son of a bitch," muttered Jōtarō, feeling warm blood running down his
      right arm from a two-inch cut.
       Iori took a stance and fixed his mind on the lesson Musashi had drummed
into him. Eyes ... Eyes ... Eyes ... His strength concentrated in his bright pupils,
his whole being seemed to be channeled into a pair of fiery eyes.
       Outstared, Jōtarō whipped out his own sword. "I'll have to kill you," he
snarled.
       Iori, taking fresh courage from the strike he had scored, charged, his attack
the one he always employed against Musashi.
       Jōtarō was having second thoughts. He hadn't believed Iori could use a
sword; now he put his full strength into the fight. For the sake of his comrades,
he had to get this meddling child out of the way. Seemingly ignoring Iori's
attack, he pressed forward and swung viciously, but unsuccessfully.
       After two or three parries, Iori turned around, ran, stopped, and charged
again. When Jōtarō countered, he retreated again, encouraged to see that his
strategy was working. He was drawing the opponent into his own territory.
       Pausing to catch his breath, Jōtarō looked around the dark grove and
shouted, "Where are you, you stupid little bastard?" The answer was a shower of
bark and leaves. Jōtarō raised his head and shouted, "I see you," though all he
could actually see through the foliage was a couple of stars.
       Jōtarō started climbing toward the rustling sound Iori made as he moved
out on a limb. From there, unfortunately, there was nowhere to go.
       "I've got you now. Unless you can grow wings, you'd better give up.
Otherwise you're dead."
       Iori moved silently back to the fork of two limbs. Jōtarō climbed slowly
and carefully. When Jōtarō reached out to grab him, Iori again moved out on one

of the limbs. With a grunt, Jōtarō caught hold of a branch with both hands and
started to pull himself up, giving Iori the chance he'd been waiting for. With a
resounding whack, his sword connected with the branch Jōtarō was on. It broke,
and Jōtarō plummeted to the ground.
       "How do you like that, thief!" gloated Iori.
       His fall broken by lower branches, Jōtarō wasn't seriously injured, except
for his pride. He cursed and started back up the tree, this time with the speed of a
leopard. When he was under Iori's feet again, Iori slashed back and forth with his
sword to keep him from getting any nearer.
       While they were locked in stalemate, the plaintive tones of a shakuhachi
came to their ears. For a moment, they both stopped and listened.
       Then Jōtarō decided to try reasoning with his adversary. "All right," he
said, "you put up a better fight than I expected. I admire you for that. If you'll tell
me who asked you to follow me, I'll let you go."
       "Admit you're licked!"
       "Are you crazy?"
       "I may not be very big; but I'm Misawa Iori, the only disciple of Miyamoto
Musashi. Begging mercy would be an insult to my master's reputation. Give up!"
       "Wh-what?" said Jōtarō incredulously. "S-say that once more." His voice
was shrill and unsteady.
       "Listen carefully," Iori said proudly. "I am Misawa Iori, the only pupil of
Miyamoto Musashi. Does that surprise you?"
       Jōtarō was ready to admit defeat. With a mixture of doubt and curiosity, he
asked, "How is my teacher? Is he well? Where is he?"
       Astonished, but keeping a safe distance from Jōtarō, who was moving
closer, Iori said, "Ha! Sensei would never have a thief for a disciple."
      "Don't call me that. Didn't Musashi ever mention Jōtarō?"
      "Jōtarō?"
      "If you're really Musashi's pupil, you must've heard him mention my name
      sometime or other. I was about your age then."
      "That's a lie."
      "No it isn't. It's the truth."
       Overcome with nostalgia, Jōtarō reached out to Iori and tried to explain
that they should be friends because they were disciples of the same teacher. Still
wary, Iori took a swipe at his ribs.
       Squeezed precariously between two limbs, Jōtarō barely succeeded in
clasping his hand around Iori's wrist. For some reason, Iori let go of the branch

he was holding on to. When they fell, they fell together, one landing on top of
the other, both knocked senseless.


       The light in Musashi's new house was visible from all directions, since,
though the roof was in place, the walls hadn't been built yet.
       Takuan, arriving the day before for an after-the-storm call, had decided to
wait for Musashi's return. Today, just after nightfall, his enjoyment of his solitary
surroundings had been interrupted by a mendicant priest asking for hot water to
go with his supper.
       After his meager meal of rice balls, the aged priest had taken it upon
himself to play his shakuhachi for Takuan, fingering his instrument in a halting,
amateurish fashion. Yet as Takuan listened, the music struck him as having
genuine feeling, albeit of the artless sort often expressed in poems by non-poets.
He thought, too, that he could recognize the emotion the player was attempting
to wring from his instrument. It was remorse, from the first off-key note to the
last—a wailing cry of repentance.
       It seemed to be the story of the man's life, but then, Takuan reflected, that
couldn't have been too different from his own. Whether people were great or not,
there was not much variety in their inner life experience. Any difference lay
merely in how they dealt with common human weaknesses. To Takuan, both he
and the other man were basically a bundle of illusions wrapped in human skin.
       "I do believe I've seen you before somewhere," Takuan murmured
thoughtfully.
       The priest blinked his almost sightless eyes and said, "Now that you
mention it, I thought I recognized your voice. Aren't you Takuan Sōhō from
Tajima?"
       Takuan's memory cleared. Moving the lamp closer to the man's face, he
said, "You're Aoki Tanzaemon, aren't you?"
       "Then you are Takuan. Oh, I wish I could crawl into a hole and hide this
miserable flesh of mine!"
       "How strange we should meet in a place like this. It's been nearly ten years
since that time at the Shippōji, hasn't it?"
       "Thinking of those days gives me a chill." Then he said stiffly, "Now that
I'm reduced to wandering about in darkness, this wretched sack of bones is
sustained only by thoughts of my son."
       "Do you have a son?"

       "I've been told he's with that man who was tied up in the old cryptomeria
tree. Takezō, was it? I hear he's called Miyamoto Musashi now. The two of them
are said to have come east."
       "You mean your son is Musashi's disciple?"
       "That's what they say. I was so ashamed. I couldn't face Musashi, so I
resolved to put the boy out of my mind. But now ... he's seventeen this year. If
only I could have one look at him and see what kind of a man he's growing up to
be, I'd be ready and willing to die."
       "So Jōtarō's your son. I didn't know that," said Takuan.
       Tanzaemon nodded. There was no hint in his shriveled form of the proud
captain filled with lust for Otsū. Takuan gazed at him with pity, pained to see
Tanzaemon so tormented by guilt.
       Seeing that despite his priestly garb he lacked even the comfort of
religious faith, Takuan decided the first thing he should do was bring him face to
face with the Buddha Amida, whose infinite mercy saves even those guilty of the
ten evils and the five deadly sins. There would be time enough after he'd
recovered from his despair to look for Jōtarō.
       Takuan gave him the name of a Zen temple in Edo. "If you tell them I sent
you, they'll let you stay as long as you wish. As soon as I have time, I'll come
and we'll have a long talk. I have an idea where your son might be. I'll do
everything I can to make sure you see him in the not too distant future. In the
meantime, give up brooding. Even after a man's fifty or sixty, he can still know
happiness, even do useful work. You may live for many more years. Talk it over
with the priests when you get to the temple."
       Takuan shooed Tanzaemon out the door, unceremoniously and without
showing any sympathy, but Tanzaemon seemed to appreciate the unsentimental
attitude. After numerous bows of gratitude, he picked up his reed hat and
shakuhachi and left.
       For fear of slipping, Tanzaemon chose to go through the woods, where the
path sloped more gently. Presently his cane struck an obstacle. Feeling around
with his hands, he was surprised to find two bodies lying motionless on the
damp ground.
       He hurried back to the cabin. "Takuan! Can you help me? I came across
two unconscious boys in the woods." Takuan roused himself and came outside.
Tanzaemon continued: "I don't have any medicine with me, and I can't see well
enough to get water for them."
       Takuan slipped on his sandals and shouted toward the bottom of the hill.

His voice carried easily. A farmer answered, asking him what he wanted. Takuan
told him to bring a torch, some men and some water. While he waited, he
suggested to Tanzaemon that the road was the better way to go, described it in
detail and sent him on his way. Halfway down the hill, Tanzaemon passed the
men coming up.
       When Takuan arrived with the farmers, Jōtarō had come to and was sitting
underneath the tree, looking dazed. One hand resting on Iori's arm, he was
debating whether to revive him and find out what he wanted to know or to get
away from there. He reacted to the torch like a nocturnal animal, tensing his
muscles, ready to run.
       "What's going on here?" asked Takuan. As he looked more closely,
inquisitive interest turned to surprise, a surprise matched by Jōtarō's. The young
man was much taller than the boy Takuan had known, and his face had changed
quite a bit.
       "You're Jōtarō, aren't you?"
       The youth placed both hands on the ground and bowed. "Yes, I am," he
replied haltingly, almost fearfully. He'd recognized Takuan instantly.
       "Well, I must say, you've grown up to be a fine young man." Turning his
attention to Iori, he put his arm around him and ascertained that he was still
alive.
       Iori revived, and after looking around curiously for a few seconds, burst
into tears.
       "What's the matter?" Takuan asked soothingly. "Are you hurt?"
       Iori shook his head and blubbered, "I'm not hurt. But they took my teacher
away. He's in the prison in Chichibu." With Iori bawling the way he was, Takuan
had trouble understanding him, but soon the basic facts of the story became
clear. Takuan, realizing the seriousness of the situation, was nearly as grieved as
Iori.
       Jōtarō, too, was deeply agitated. In a shaky voice, he said abruptly,
"Takuan, I have something to tell you. Could we go somewhere where we can
talk?"
       "He's one of the thieves," said Iori. "You can't trust him. Anything he says
will be a lie." He pointed accusingly at Jōtarō, and they glared at each other.
       "Shut up, both of you. Let me decide who's right and who's wrong."
Takuan led them back to the house and ordered them to build a fire outside.
       Seating himself by the fire, Takuan commanded them to do likewise. Iori
hesitated, his expression saying very plainly he had no intention of being

friendly with a thief. But seeing Takuan and Jōtarō talking amiably over old
times, he felt a pang of jealousy and grudgingly took a seat near them.
       Jōtarō lowered his voice, and like a woman confessing her sins before the
Buddha, became very earnest.
       "For four years now, I've been receiving training from a man named Daizō.
He comes from Narai in Kiso. I've learned about his aspirations and what he
wants to do for the world. I'd be willing to die for him, if necessary. And that's
why I've tried to help him with his work.... Well, it does hurt to be called a thief.
But I'm still Musashi's disciple. Even though I'm separated from him, I've never
been apart from him in spirit, not even for a day."
       He hurried on, not waiting to be asked questions. "Daizō and I have sworn
by the gods of heaven and earth not to tell anyone what our aim in life is. I can't
even tell you. Still, I can't stand by when Musashi's been thrown in prison. I'll go
to Chichibu tomorrow and confess."
       Takuan said, "Then it was you and Daizō who robbed the treasure house."
"Yes," Jōtarō replied without the slightest sign of contrition.
       "So you are a thief," said Takuan.
       Jōtarō lowered his head to avoid Takuan's eyes. "No ... no," he murmured
lamely. "We're not just common burglars."
       "I was not aware that thieves came in different varieties."
       "Well, what I'm trying to say is we don't do these things for our own gain.
We do them for the people. It's a matter of moving public property for the good
of the public."
       "I don't understand reasoning like that. Are you telling me your robberies
are righteous crimes? Are you saying you're like the bandit heroes in Chinese
novels? If so, it's a poor imitation."
       "I can't answer that without revealing my secret agreement with Daizō."
"Ha, ha. You aren't going to let yourself be taken in, are you?"
       "I don't care what you say. I'll confess only to save Musashi. I hope you'll
put in a good word for me with him later."
       "I wouldn't be able to think of a good word to put in. Musashi's innocent.
Whether you confess or not, he'll be freed eventually. It seems to me it's far more
important for you to take yourself to the Buddha. Use me as an intermediary and
confess everything to him."
       "Buddha?"
       "That's what I said. To hear you tell it, you're doing something grand for
the sake of other people. In fact, you're putting yourself before others. Has it not

occurred to you that you leave quite a number of people unhappy?"
       "One can't consider himself when one is working on behalf of society."
       "Stupid fool!" He struck Jōtarō soundly on the cheek with his fist. "One's
self is the basis of everything. Every action is a manifestation of the self. A
person who doesn't know himself can do nothing for others."
       "What I meant—I wasn't acting to satisfy my own desires."
       "Shut up! Don't you see you're barely grown? There's nothing more
frightening than a half-baked do-gooder who knows nothing of the world but
takes it upon himself to tell the world what's good for it. You needn't say any
more about what you and Daizō are doing; I have a very good idea already....
What are you crying about? Blow your nose."
       Ordered to bed, Jōtarō lay down obediently but couldn't get to sleep for
thinking of Musashi. He clasped his hands together over his chest and silently
begged forgiveness. Tears dribbled into his ears. He turned on his side and began
thinking about Otsū. His cheek hurt; Otsū’s tears would hurt worse. Still,
revealing his secret promise to Daizō was inconceivable, even if Takuan tried to
get it out of him in the morning, as he was sure to do.
      He got up without making a sound, went outside and looked up at the stars.
      He would have to hurry; the night was nearly gone.
      "Stop!" The voice froze Jōtarō where he was. Behind him, Takuan was a
      huge shadow.
      The priest came to his side and put his arm around him. "Are you
      determined to go and confess?"
      Jōtarō nodded.
       "That's not very intelligent," said Takuan sympathetically. "You'll die a
dog's death. You seem to think that if you give yourself up, Musashi will be set
free, but it isn't that simple. The officials will keep Musashi in prison until you
tell them everything you've been refusing to tell me. And you—you'll be tortured
until you talk, whether it takes a year, two years or more."
       Jōtarō hung his head.
       "Is that what you want, to die a dog's death? But you have no choice now:
either you confess everything under torture or you tell me everything. As a
disciple of the Buddha, I'll not sit in judgment. I'll relay it to Amida."
       Jōtarō said nothing.
       "There is one other way. By the sheerest chance, I happened to meet your
father last night. He now wears the robes of a mendicant priest. Of course, I
never dreamed you were here too. I sent him to a temple in Edo. If you've made

up your mind to die, it'd be good for you to see him first. And when you see him,
you can ask him if I'm not right.
      "Jōtarō, there're three paths open to you. You must decide for yourself
which one to follow." He turned away and started back into the house.
      Jōtarō realized that the shakuhachi he had heard the night before must
have belonged to his father. Without being told, he could imagine how his father
must look and feel as he wandered around from place to place.
      "Takuan, wait! I'll talk. I'll tell everything to the Buddha, including my
promise to Daizō." He caught hold of the priest's sleeve, and the two went into
the grove.
     Jōtarō confessed in a long monologue, omitting nothing. Takuan neither
     moved a muscle nor spoke.
     "That's all," said Jōtarō.
     "Everything?"
     "Every single thing."
     "Good."
      Takuan remained silent for fully an hour. Dawn came. Crows began
cawing; dew glistened everywhere. Takuan sat on the root of a cryptomeria.
Jōtarō leaned against another tree, head bowed, waiting for the tongue-lashing he
knew was coming.
      When Takuan finally spoke, he appeared to have no more doubts. "I must
say, you got mixed up with quite a crowd. Heaven help them. They don't
understand which way the world is turning. It's a good thing you told me before
matters got worse." Reaching into his kimono, he produced, surprisingly enough,
two gold coins and handed them to Jōtarō. "You'd better get away as fast as you
can. The slightest delay may bring disaster not only to you but to your father and
your teacher. Get as far away as possible but don't go near the Kōshū highroad or
the Nakasendō. By noon today, they'll be carrying out a rigid check on all
travelers."
      "What'll happen to Sensei? I can't go away and leave him where he is."
      "Leave that to me. After a year or two, when things have quieted down,
you can go to see him and make your apologies. Then I'll put in a good word for
you.
     "Good-bye."
     "Just a minute."
     "Yes?"
      "Go to Edo first. In Azabu there's a Zen temple called Shōjuan. Your father

should be there by now. Take this seal I received from the Daitokuji. They'll
know it's mine. Get them to give you and your father priests' hats and robes, as
well as the necessary credentials. Then you can travel in disguise."
      "Why do I have to pretend to be a priest?"
      "Is there no end to your naiveté? You, my silly young friend, are an agent
of a group planning to kill the shōgun, set fire to Ieyasu's castle in Suruga, throw
the whole Kantō district into confusion and take over the government. In short,
you're a traitor. If you're caught, the mandatory punishment is death by hanging."
      Jōtarō's mouth fell open.
      "Now go."
      "May I ask one question? Why should men who want to overthrow the
Tokugawas be considered traitors? Why aren't the ones who overthrew the
Toyotomis and seized control of the country traitors?"
      "Don't ask me," Takuan answered with a cold stare.
