A Spring Breeze


      On the bank of the Takase River, Akemi was rinsing a strip of cloth and
singing a song she had learned at the Okuni Kabuki. Each time she pulled at the
flower-patterned cloth, it created an illusion of swirling cherry blossoms.


      The breeze of love
      Tugs at the sleeve of my kimono.
      Oh, the sleeve weighs heavy!
      Is the breeze of love heavy?


       Jōtarō stood on top of the dike. His lively eyes surveyed the scene and he
smiled amicably. "You sing well, Auntie," he called out.
       "What's that?" asked Akemi. She looked up at the gnomelike child with his
long wooden sword and his enormous basket hat. "Who are you?" she asked.
"And what do you mean, calling me Auntie? I'm still young!"
       "Okay—Sweet Young Girl. How's that?"
       "Stop it," she said with a laugh. "You're much too little to be flirting. Why
don't you blow your nose instead?"
      "I only wanted to ask a question."
      "Oh, my!" she cried in consternation. "There goes my cloth!"
      "I'll get it for you."
      Jōtarō chased down the riverbank after the cloth, then fished it out of the
       water with his sword. At least, he reflected, it comes in handy in a
situation like this one. Akemi thanked him and asked what he wanted to know.
"Is there a teahouse around here called the Yomogi?"
      "Why, yes, it's my house, right over there."
      "Am I glad to hear that! I've spent a long time looking for it."
      "Why? Where do you come from?"
      "Over that way," he replied, pointing vaguely.
      "And just where might that be?"
      He hesitated. "I'm not really sure."

       Akemi giggled. "Never mind. But why are you interested in our
teahouse?" "I'm looking for a man named Hon'iden Matahachi. They told me at
the Yoshioka School that if I went to the Yomogi, I'd find him."
      "He's not there."
      "You're lying!"
      "Oh, no; it's true. He used to stay with us, but he went off some time ago."
      "Where to?"
      "I don't know."
      "But someone at your house must know!"
      "No. My mother doesn't know either. He just ran away."
       "Oh, no." The boy crouched down and stared worriedly into the river.
"Now what am I supposed to do?" he sighed.
      "Who sent you here?"
      "My teacher."
      "Who's your teacher?"
      "His name is Miyamoto Musashi."
      "Did you bring a letter?"
      "No," said Jōtarō, shaking his head.
      "A fine messenger you are! You don't know where you came from, and you
      don't have a letter with you."
      "I have a message to deliver."
       "What is it? He may never come back, but if he does, I'll tell him for you."
"I don't think I should do that, do you?"
       "Don't ask me. Make up your own mind."
       "Maybe I should, then. He said he wanted to see Matahachi very much. He
said to tell Matahachi that he'd wait on the great bridge at Gojō Avenue every
morning from the first day to the seventh day of the new year. Matahachi should
meet him there on one of those days."
       Akemi broke into uncontrollable laughter. "I never heard of such a thing!
You mean he's sending a message now telling Matahachi to meet him next year?
Your teacher must be as strange as you are! Ha, ha!"
       A scowl came over Jōtarō's face, and his shoulders tensed with anger.
"What's so funny?"
       Akemi finally managed to stop laughing. "Now you're angry, aren't you?"
"Of course I am. I just asked you politely to do me a favor, and you start
laughing like a lunatic."
       "I'm sorry, I really am. I won't laugh anymore. And if Matahachi comes

back, I'll give him your message."
       "Is that a promise?"
       "Yes, I swear." Biting her lips to avoid smiling, Akemi asked, "What was
his name again? The man who sent you with the message."
       "Your memory's not too good, is it? His name is Miyamoto Musashi."
"How do you write Musashi?"
       Picking up a bamboo stick, Jōtarō scratched the two characters in the sand.
"Why, those are the characters for Takezō!" exclaimed Akemi.
      "His name isn't Takezō. It's Musashi."
      "Yes, but they can also be read Takezō."
      "Stubborn, aren't you?" snapped Jōtarō, tossing the bamboo stick into the
      river.
       Akemi stared fixedly at the characters in the sand, lost in thought. Finally
she lifted her gaze from the ground to Jōtarō, reexamined him from head to toe,
and in a soft voice asked, "I wonder if Musashi is from the Yoshino area in
Mimasaka."
       "Yes. I'm from Harima; he's from the village of Miyamoto in the
neighboring province of Mimasaka."
       "Is he tall and manly? And does he leave the top of his head unshaved?"
"Yes. How did you know?"
       "I remember him telling me once that when he was a child he had a
carbuncle on the top of his head. If he shaved it the way samurai usually do, you
would see an ugly scar."
      "Told you? When?"
      "Oh, it's been five years now."
      "Have you known my teacher that long?"
       Akemi did not answer. The memory of those days evoked stirrings in her
heart that made even speaking difficult. Convinced from the little the boy had
said that Musashi was Takezō, she was gripped by a yearning to see him again.
She had seen her mother's way of doing things, and she had watched Matahachi
go from bad to worse. From the first, she had preferred Takezō and had since
grown more and more confident in the rightness of his choice. She was glad to
be still single. Takezō—he was so different from Matahachi.
       Many were the times she had resolved to never let herself wind up with the
likes of the men who always drank at the teahouse. She scorned them, holding
on firmly to the image of Takezō. Deep within her heart, she nourished the
dream of finding him again; he, only he, was the lover in her mind when she

sang love songs to herself.
      His mission fulfilled, Jōtarō said, "Well, I'd better be going now. If you
find Matahachi, be sure to tell him what I told you." He hurried off, trotting
along the narrow top of the dike.


      The oxcart was loaded with a mountain of sacks, containing rice perhaps,
or lentil beans, or some other local product. On top of the pile, a plaque
proclaimed that this was a contribution being sent by faithful Buddhists to the
great Kōfukuji in Nara. Even Jōtarō knew of this temple, for its name was
virtually synonymous with Nara.
      Jōtarō's face lit up with childish joy. Chasing after the vehicle, he climbed
up on back. If he faced backward, there was just enough room to sit down. As an
added luxury, he had the sacks to lean against.
      On either side of the road, the rolling hills were covered with neat rows of
tea bushes. The cherry trees had begun to bloom, and farmers were plowing their
barley—praying, no doubt, that this year it would once again be safe from the
trampling feet of soldiers and horses. Women knelt by the streams washing their
vegetables. The Yamato highroad was at peace.
      "What luck!" thought Jōtarō, as he settled back and relaxed. Comfortable
on his perch, he was tempted to go to sleep but thought better of it. Fearing they
might reach Nara before he awoke, he was thankful every time the wheels struck
a rock and the wagon shook, since it helped him keep his eyes open. Nothing
could have given him more pleasure than to be not only moving along like this
but actually heading toward his destination.
      Outside one village, Jōtarō lazily reached out and plucked a leaf from a
camellia tree. Putting it to his tongue, he began to whistle a tune.
      The wagon driver looked back, but could see nothing. Since the whistling
went on and on, he looked over his left shoulder, then his right shoulder, several
more times. Finally he stopped the wagon and walked around to the back. The
sight of Jōtarō threw him into a rage, and the blow from his fist was so sharp the
boy cried out in pain.
     "What're you doing up there?" he snarled.
     "It's all right, isn't it?"
     "It is not all right!"
     "Why not? You're not pulling it yourself!"
      "You impudent little bastard!" shouted the driver, tossing Jōtarō onto the

ground like a ball. He bounced and rolled against the foot of a tree. Starting off
with a rumble, the wheels of the wagon seemed to be laughing at him.
       J nottarō picked himself up and began to search carefully around on the
ground. He'd just noticed he no longer had the bamboo tube containing the reply
from the Yoshioka School to Musashi. He had hung it from his neck with a cord,
but now it was gone.
       As the totally distraught boy gradually widened the area of his search, a
young woman in traveling clothes, who had stopped to watch him, asked, "Did
you lose something?"
      He glanced at her face, which was partially hidden by a broad-brimmed hat,
      nodded and resumed his search.
      "Was it money?"
      Jōtarō, thoroughly absorbed, paid little attention to the question, but
      managed a negative grunt.
       "Well, was it a bamboo tube about a foot long with a cord attached?"
Jōtarō jumped up. "Yes! How did you know?"
       "So it was you the drivers near the Mampukuji were yelling at for teasing
their horse!"
       "Ah-h-h . . . well . . . "
       "When you got scared and ran, the cord must've broken. The tube fell on
the road, and the samurai who'd been talking to the drivers picked it up. Why
don't you go back and ask him about it?"
      "Are you sure?"
      "Yes, of course."
      "Thanks."
       Just as he started to run off, the young woman called after him. "Wait!
There's no need to go back. I can see the samurai coming this way. The one in
the field hakarna." She pointed toward the man.
       Jōtarō stopped and waited, eyes wide.
       The samurai was an impressive man of about forty. Everything about him
was a little bigger than life—his height, his jet-black beard, his broad shoulders,
his massive chest. He wore leather socks and straw sandals, and when he
walked, his firm footsteps seemed to compact the earth. Jōtarō, certain at a
glance that this was a great warrior in the service of one of the more prominent
daimyō, felt too frightened to address him.
       Fortunately, the samurai spoke first, summoning the boy. "Weren't you the
imp who dropped this bamboo tube in front of the Mampukuji?" he asked. "Oh,

that's it! You found it!"
        "Don't you know how to say thank you?"
        "I'm sorry. Thank you, sir."
        "I daresay there's an important letter inside. When your master sends you
on a mission, you shouldn't be stopping along the way to tease horses, hitching
rides on wagons, or loafing by the wayside."
        "Yes, sir. Did you look inside, sir?"
        "It's only natural when you've found something to examine it and return it
to its owner, but I did not break the seal on the letter. Now that you have it back,
you should check and see that it's in good order."
        Jōtarō took the cap from the tube and peered inside. Satisfied that the letter
was still there, he hung the tube from his neck and swore not to lose it a second
time.
        The young woman looked as pleased as Jōtarō. "It was very kind of you,
sir," she said to the samurai, in an attempt to make up for Jōtarō's inability to
express himself properly.
        The bearded samurai started walking along with the two of them. "Is the
boy with you?" he asked her.
        "Oh, no. I've never seen him before."
        The samurai laughed. "I thought you made a rather strange pair. He's a
funny-looking little devil, isn't he—'Lodgings' written on his hat and all?"
        "Perhaps it's his youthful innocence that's so appealing. I like him too."
Turning to Jōtarō, she asked, "Where are you going?"
        Walking along between them, Jōtarō was once again in high spirits. "Me?
I'm going to Nara, to the Hōzōin." A long, narrow object wrapped in gold
brocade and nestled in the girl's obi caught his eye. Staring at it, he said, "I see
you have a letter tube too. Be careful you don't lose it."
      "Letter tube? What do you mean?"
      "There, in your obi."
      She laughed. "This isn't a letter tube, silly! It's a flute."
        "A flute?" Eyes burning with curiosity, Jōtarō unabashedly moved his head
close to her waist to inspect the object. Suddenly, a strange feeling came over
him. He pulled back and seemed to be examining the girl.
        Even children have a sense of feminine beauty, or at least they understand
instinctively whether a woman is pure or not. Jōtarō was impressed with the
girl's loveliness and respected it. It seemed to him an unimaginable stroke of
good luck that he should be walking along with one so pretty. His heart throbbed

and he felt giddy.
      "I see. A flute . . . Do you play the flute, Auntie?" he asked. Then,
obviously remembering Akemi's reaction to the word, he abruptly changed his
question. "What's your name?"
      The girl laughed and cast an amused glance over the boy's head at the
samurai. The bearlike warrior joined in the laughter, displaying a row of strong
white teeth behind his beard.
     "You're a fine one, you are! When you ask someone's name, it's only good
     manners to state your own first."
     "My name's Jōtarō."
     This brought forth more laughter.
      "That's not fair!" cried Jōtarō. "You made me tell my name, but I still don't
know yours. What's your name, sir?"
     "My name's Shōda," said the samurai.
     "That must be your family name. What's your other name?"
     "I'll have to ask you to let me off on that one."
      Undaunted, Jōtarō turned to the girl and said, "Now it's your turn. We told
you our names. It wouldn't be polite for you not to tell us yours."
      "Mine is Otsū."
      "Otsū?" Jōtarō repeated. He seemed satisfied for a moment, but then
chattered on. "Why do you go around with a flute in your obi?"
      "Oh, I need this to make my living."
      "Are you a flute player by profession?"
      "Well, I'm not sure there's any such thing as a professional flute player, but
the money I get for playing makes it possible for me to take long trips like this
one. I suppose you could call it my profession."
     "Is the music you play like the music I've heard at Gion and the Kamo
     Shrine? The music for the sacred dances?"
     "No."
     "Is it like the music for other kinds of dancing—Kabuki maybe?" "No."
     "Then what kind do you play?"
     "Oh, just ordinary melodies."
      The samurai had meanwhile been wondering about Jōtarō's long wooden
sword. "What's that you've got stuck in your waist?" he asked.
      "Don't you know a wooden sword when you see one? I thought you were a
samurai."
      "Yes, I am. I'm just surprised to see one on you. Why are you carrying it?"

"I'm going to study swordsmanship."
      "Oh, are you now? Do you have a teacher yet?"
      "I do."
      "And is he the person to whom the letter is addressed?"
      "Yes."
       "If he's your teacher, he must be a real expert."
      "He's not all that good."
      "What do you mean?"
      "Everybody says he's weak."
      "Doesn't it bother you to have a weak man for a teacher?"
      "No. I'm no good with the sword either, so it doesn't make any difference."
       The samurai could hardly contain his amusement. His mouth quivered as if
to break into a smile, but his eyes remained grave. "Have you learned any
techniques?"
       "Well, not exactly. I haven't learned anything at all yet."
       The samurai's laughter finally burst forth. "Walking with you makes the
road seem shorter! . . . And you, young lady, where are you going?"
       "Nara, but exactly where in Nara I don't know. There's a rōnin I've been
trying to locate for a year or so, and since I've heard that a lot of them have
gathered in Nara recently, I'm planning to go there, though I admit the rumor's
not much to go on."
       The bridge at Uji came into view. Under the eaves of a teahouse, a very
proper old man with a large teakettle was purveying his stock-in-trade to his
customers, who were seated around him on stools. Catching sight of Shōda, he
greeted him warmly. "How nice to see someone from the House of Yagyū!" he
called. "Come in, come in!"
       "We'd just like to take a short rest. Could you bring the boy here some
sweet cakes?"
       Jōtarō remained on his feet while his companions sat. To him, the idea of
sitting down and resting was a bore; once the cakes arrived, he grabbed them and
ran up the low hill behind the teahouse.
       Otsū, sipping her tea, inquired of the old man, "Is it still a long way to
Nara?"
       "Yes. Even a fast walker'd probably get no farther than Kizu before sunset.
A girl like you should plan to spend the night at Taga or Ide."
       Shōda spoke up immediately. "This young lady has been searching for
someone for months. But I wonder, do you think it's safe these days for a young

woman to travel to Nara alone, with no place to stay in mind?"
       The old man grew wide-eyed at the question. "She shouldn't even consider
it!" he said decisively. Turning to Otsū, he waved his hand back and forth before
his face and said, "Give the idea up entirely. If you were sure you had someone
to stay with, it'd be a different matter. If you don't, Nara can be a very dangerous
place."
       The proprietor poured a cup of tea for himself and told them what he knew
of the situation in Nara. Most people, it seemed, had the impression that the old
capital was a quiet, peaceful place where there were lots of colorful temples and
tame deer—a place undisturbed by war or famine—but in fact the town was no
longer like that at all. After the Battle of Sekigahara, nobody knew how many
rōnin from the losing side had come to hide there. Most of them were Osaka
partisans from the Western Army, samurai who now had no income and little
hope of finding another profession. With the Tokugawa shōgunate growing in
power year by year, it was doubtful whether these fugitives would ever again be
able to make a living out in the open with their swords.
       According to most estimates, 120,000 to 130,000 samurai had lost their
positions. Being the victors, the Tokugawas had confiscated estates representing
an annual income of 33 million bushels of rice. Even if the feudal lords who had
since been allowed to reestablish themselves on a more modest scale were taken
into consideration, at least eighty daimyō, with incomes thought to total 20
million bushels, had been dispossessed. On the basis that for every 500 bushels,
three samurai had been cut loose from their moorings and forced into hiding in
various provinces—and including their families and retainers—the total number
could not be less than 100,000.
       The area around Nara and Mount Kōya was full of temples and therefore
difficult for the Tokugawa forces to patrol. By the same token, it was an ideal
hiding place, and the fugitives moved there in droves.
       "Why," said the old man, "the famous Sanada Yukimura is in hiding at
Mount Kudo, and Sengoku Sōya is said to be in the vicinity of the Hōryūji, and
Ban Dan'emon at the Kōfukuji. I could name many more." All these were
marked men, who would be killed instantly if they showed themselves; their one
hope for the future was for war to break out again.
       The old man's opinion was that it wouldn't be so bad if it were only these
famous rōnin hiding out, since they all had a degree of prestige and could make a
living for themselves and their families. Complicating the picture, however, were
the indigent samurai who prowled the city's back streets in such straits that

they'd sell their swords if they could. Half of them had taken to picking fights,
gambling and otherwise disturbing the peace, in the hope that the havoc they
caused would make the Osaka forces rise up and take arms. The once tranquil
city of Nara had turned into a nest of desperadoes. For a nice girl like Otsū to go
there would be tantamount to her pouring oil on her kimono and jumping into a
fire. The teahouse proprietor, stirred by his own recitation, concluded by strongly
begging Otsū to change her mind.
        Now doubtful, Otsū sat silently for a while. If she had had the slightest
indication that Musashi might be in Nara, she would not have given danger a
second thought. But she really had nothing to go on. She had merely wandered
toward Nara—just as she had wandered around to various other places in the
year since Musashi had left her stranded at the bridge in Himeji.
        Shōda, seeing the perplexity on her face, said, "You said your name is
Otsū, didn't you?"
        "Yes."
        "Well, Otsū, I hesitate to say this, but why don't you give up the idea of
going to Nara and come with me to the Koyagyū fief instead?" Feeling obliged
to tell her more about himself and assure her that his intentions were honorable,
he continued, "My full name is Shōda Kizaemon, and I'm in the service of the
Yagyū family. It happens that my lord, who's now eighty, is no longer active. He
suffers terribly from boredom. When you said you make your living by playing
the flute, it occurred to me that it might be a great comfort to him if you were
around to play for him from time to time. Do you think you'd like that?"
        The old man immediately chimed in with enthusiastic approval. "You
should definitely go with him," he urged. "As you probably know, the old lord of
Koyagyū is the great Yagyū Muneyoshi. Now that he's retired, he's taken the
name Sekishūsai. As soon as his heir, Munenori, lord of Tajima, returned from
Sekigahara, he was summoned to Edo and appointed an instructor in the
shōgun's household. Why, there's no greater family in Japan than the Yagyūs. To
be invited to Koyagyū is an honor in itself. Please, by all means, accept!"
        On hearing that Kizaemon was an official in the famous House of Yagyū,
Otsū congratulated herself for having guessed that he was no ordinary samurai.
Still, she found it difficult to reply to his proposal.
        Faced with her silence, Kizaemon asked, "Don't you want to come?"
        "It's not that. I couldn't wish for a better offer. I'm simply afraid my
playing isn't good enough for a great man like Yagyū Muneyoshi."
        "Oh, don't give it a second thought. The Yagyūs are very different from the

other daimyō. Sekishūsai in particular has the simple, quiet tastes of a tea-
master. He would be more upset, I think, by your diffidence than by what you
fancy to be your lack of skill."
       Otsū realized that going to Koyagyū, rather than wandering aimlessly to
Nara, offered some hope, however slight. Since the death of Yoshioka Kemp&
the Yagyūs had been considered by many to be the greatest exponents of the
martial arts in the country. It was only to be expected that swordsmen from all
over the country would call at their gate, and there might even be a registry of
visitors. How happy she would be if on that list she found the name of Miyamoto
Musashi!
       With that possibility foremost in mind, she said brightly, "If you really
think it's all right, I'll go."
       "You will? Wonderful! I'm very grateful. . . . Hmm, I doubt that a woman
could walk all the way there before nightfall. Can you ride a horse?"
       "Yes."
       Kizaemon ducked under the eaves of the shop and raised his hand toward
the bridge. The groom waiting there came running forward with a horse, which
Kizaemon let Otsū ride, while he himself walked along beside her.
      Jōtarō spotted them from the hill behind the teahouse and called, "Are you
      leaving already?"
      "Yes, we're off."
      "Wait for me!"
       They were halfway across Uji Bridge when Jōtarō caught up with them.
Kizaemon asked him what he had been up to, and he answered that a lot of men
in a grove on the hill were playing some kind of game. He didn't know what
game it was, but it looked interesting.
       The groom laughed. "That would be the rōnin riffraff having a gambling
session. They don't have enough money to eat, so they lure travelers into their
games and take them for everything they're worth. It's disgraceful!"
       "Oh, so they gamble for a living?" asked Kizaemon.
       "The gamblers are among the better ones," replied the groom. "Many
others have become kidnappers and blackmailers. They're such a rough lot
nobody can do anything to stop them."
       "Why doesn't the lord of the district arrest them or drive them away?"
       "There are too many of them—far more than he can cope with. If all the
rōnin from Kawachi, Yamato and Kii joined together, they'd be stronger than his
own troops."

      "I hear Kōga's swarming with them too."
      "Yes. The ones from Tsutsui fled there. They're determined to hang on until
      the next war."
      "You keep talking that way about the rōnin," Jōtarō broke in, "but some of
      them must be good men."
      "That's true," agreed Kizaemon.
      Faced with her silence, Kizaemon asked, "Don't you want to come?"
       "It's not that. I couldn't wish for a better offer. I'm simply afraid my
playing isn't good enough for a great man like Yagyū Muneyoshi."
       "Oh, don't give it a second thought. The Yagyūs are very different from the
other daimyō. Sekishūsai in particular has the simple, quiet tastes of a tea-
master. He would be more upset, I think, by your diffidence than by what you
fancy to be your lack of skill."
       Otsū realized that going to Koyagyū, rather than wandering aimlessly to
Nara, offered some hope, however slight. Since the death of Yoshioka Kempō
the Yagyūs had been considered by many to be the greatest exponents of the
martial arts in the country. It was only to be expected that swordsmen from all
over the country would call at their gate, and there might even be a registry of
visitors. How happy she would be if on that list she found the name of Miyamoto
Musashi!
       With that possibility foremost in mind, she said brightly, "If you really
think it's all right, I'll go."
       "You will? Wonderful! I'm very grateful. . . . Hmm, I doubt that a woman
could walk all the way there before nightfall. Can you ride a horse?"
       "Yes."
       Kizaemon ducked under the eaves of the shop and raised his hand toward
the bridge. The groom waiting there came running forward with a horse, which
Kizaemon let Otsū ride, while he himself walked along beside her.
      Jōtarō spotted them from the hill behind the teahouse and called, "Are you
      leaving already?"
      "Yes, we're off."
      "Wait for me!"
       They were halfway across Uji Bridge when Jōtarō caught up with them.
Kizaemon asked him what he had been up to, and he answered that a lot of men
in a grove on the hill were playing some kind of game. He didn't know what
game it was, but it looked interesting.
       The groom laughed. "That would be the rōnin riffraff having a gambling

session. They don't have enough money to eat, so they lure travelers into their
games and take them for everything they're worth. It's disgraceful!"
      "Oh, so they gamble for a living?" asked Kizaemon.
      "The gamblers are among the better ones," replied the groom. "Many
others have become kidnappers and blackmailers. They're such a rough lot
nobody can do anything to stop them."
      "Why doesn't the lord of the district arrest them or drive them away?"


       "There are too many of them—far more than he can cope with. If all the
rōnin from Kawachi, Yamato and Kii joined together, they'd be stronger than his
own troops."
      "I hear Kōga's swarming with them too."
      "Yes. The ones from Tsutsui fled there. They're determined to hang on until
      the next war."
      "You keep talking that way about the rōnin," Jōtarō broke in, "but some of
      them must be good men."
      "That's true," agreed Kizaemon.
      "My teacher's a rōnin!"
       Kizaemon laughed and said, "So that's why you spoke up in their defense.
You're loyal enough. . . . You did say you were on your way to the Hōzōin, didn't
you? Is that where your teacher is?"
      "I don't know for sure, but he said if I went there, they'd tell me where he
      is."
      "What style does he use?"
      "I don't know."
      "You're his disciple, and you don't know his style?"
       "Sir," the groom put in, "swordsmanship is a fad these days; everybody
and his brother's going around studying it. You can meet five or ten wandering
on this road alone any day of the week. It's all because there are so many more
rōnin around to give lessons than there used to be."
       "I suppose that's part of it."
       "They're attracted to it because they hear somewhere that if a fellow's good
with a sword, the daimyō will fall all over each other trying to hire him for four
or five thousand bushels a year."
       "A quick way to get rich, uh?"
       "Exactly. When you think about it, it's frightening. Why, even this boy

here has a wooden sword. He probably thinks he just has to learn how to hit
people with it to become a real man. We get a lot like that, and the sad part is, in
the end, most of them will go hungry."
      Jōtarō's anger rose in a flash. "What's that? I dare you to say that again!"
"Listen to him! He looks like a flea carrying a toothpick, but he already fancies
himself a great warrior."
      Kizaemon laughed. "Now, Jōtarō, don't get mad, or you'll lose your
bamboo tube again."
      "No I won't! Don't worry about me!"
      They walked on, Jōtarō sulking silently, the others looking at the sun as it
slowly set. Presently they arrived at the Kizu River ferry landing.
      "This is where we leave you, my boy. It'll be dark soon, so you'd better
hurry. And don't waste time along the way."
      "Otsū?" said Jōtarō, thinking she would come with him.
      "Oh, I forgot to tell you," she said. "I've decided to go along with this
gentleman to the castle at Koyagyū." Jōtarō looked crushed. "Take good care of
yourself," Otsū said, smiling.
     "I should've known I'd wind up alone again." He picked up a stone and sent
     it skimming across the water.
     "Oh, we'll see each other again one of these days. Your home seems to be
     the road, and I do a bit of traveling myself."
     Jōtarō didn't seem to want to move. "Just who are you looking for?" he
     asked. "What sort of person?"
     Without answering, Otsū waved farewell.
      Jōtarō ran along the bank and jumped into the very middle of the small
ferryboat. When the boat, red in the evening sun, was halfway across the river,
he looked back. He could just make out Otsū's horse and Kizaemon on the
Kasagi Temple road. They were in the valley, beyond the point where the
river suddenly grows narrower, slowly being swallowed up by the early
shadows of the mountain.
