The Koyagyū Fief


       Yagyū Valley lies at the foot of Mount Kasagi, northeast of Nara. In the
early seventeenth century, it was the site of a prosperous little community, too
large to be described as a mere village, yet not populous or bustling enough to be
called a town. It might naturally have been called Kasagi Village, but instead its
inhabitants referred to their home as the Kambe Demesne, a name inherited from
the bygone age of the great privately owned manorial estates.
       In the middle of the community stood the Main House, a castle that served
as both a symbol of governmental stability and the cultural center of the region.
Stone ramparts, reminiscent of ancient fortresses, surrounded the Main House.
The people of the area, as well as their lord's ancestors, had been comfortably
settled there since the tenth century, and the present ruler was a country squire in
the best tradition, who spread culture among his subjects and was at all times
prepared to protect his territory with his life. At the same time, however, he
carefully avoided any serious involvement in the wars and feuds of his fellow
lords in other districts. In short, it was a peaceful fief, governed in an
enlightened manner.
       Here one saw no traces of the depravity or degeneracy associated with
footloose samurai; it was quite unlike Nara, where ancient temples celebrated in
history and folklore were being left to go to seed. Disruptive elements simply
were not permitted to enter into the life of this community.
       The setting itself militated against ugliness. The mountains in the Kasagi
Range were no less strikingly beautiful at eventide than at sunrise, and the water
was pure and clean—ideal water, it was said, for making tea. The plum blossoms
of Tsukigase were nearby, and nightingales sang from the season of the melting
snow to that of the thunderstorms, their tones as crystal clear as the waters of the
mountain streams.
       A poet once wrote that "in the place where a hero is born, the mountains
and rivers are fresh and clear." If no hero had been born in Yagyū Valley, the
poet's words would have been empty; but this was indeed a birthplace of heroes.
No better proof could be offered than the lords of Yagyū themselves. In this
great house even the retainers were men of nobility. Many had come from the
rice fields, distinguished themselves in battle, and gone on to become loyal and

competent aides.
       Yagyū Muneyoshi Sekishūsai, now that he'd retired, had taken up
residence in a small mountain house some distance behind the Main House. He
no longer showed any interest in local government, and had no idea who was in
direct control at the moment. He had a number of capable sons and grandsons, as
well as trustworthy retainers to assist and guide them, and he was safe in
assuming that the people were being as well governed as they had been when he
was in charge.
       When Musashi arrived in this district, about ten days had passed since the
battle on Hannya Plain. On the way he had visited some temples, Kasagidera and
Jōruriji, where he'd seen relics of the Kemmu era. He put up at the local inn with
the intention of relaxing for a time, physically and spiritually.
       Dressed informally, he went out one day for a walk with Jōtarō. "It's
amazing," said Musashi, his eyes roving over the crops in the fields and the
farmers going about their work. "Amazing," he repeated several times.
       Finally Jōtarō asked, "What's amazing?" For him, the most amazing thing
was the way Musashi was talking to himself.
       "Since leaving Mimasaka, I've been in Settsu, Kawachi and Izumi
provinces, Kyoto and Nara, and I've never seen a place like this."
      "Well, so what? What's so different about it?"
      "For one thing, there are lots of trees in the mountains here."
      Jōtarō laughed. "Trees? There are trees everywhere. Well, aren't there?"
       "Yes, but here it's different. All the trees in Yagyū are old. That means
there haven't been any wars here, no enemy troops burning or cutting down the
forests. It also means there haven't been any famines, at least for a long, long
time."
       "That's all?"
       "No. The fields are green too, and the new barley has been well trampled
to strengthen the roots and make it grow well. Listen! Can't you hear the sound
of spinning wheels? It seems to be coming from every house. And haven't you
noticed that when travelers in fine clothing pass by, the farmers don't look at
them enviously?"
       "Anything else?"
       "As you can see, there are many young girls working the fields. This
means that the district is well off, that life is normal here. The children are
growing up healthy, the old people are treated with due respect, and the young
men and women aren't running off to live uncertain lives in other places. It's a

safe bet that the lord of the district is wealthy, and that the swords and guns in
his armory are kept polished and in the best condition."
       "I don't see anything so interesting in all that," complained Jōtarō. "Hmm,
I don't imagine you would."
       "Anyway, you didn't come here to admire the scenery. Aren't you going to
fight the samurai in the House of Yagyū?"
       "Fighting isn't all there is to the Art of War. The men who think that way,
and are satisfied to have food to eat and a place to sleep, are mere vagabonds. A
serious student is much more concerned with training his mind and disciplining
his spirit than with developing martial skills. He has to learn about all sorts of
things—geography, irrigation, the people's feelings, their manners and customs,
their relationship with the lord of their territory. He wants to know what goes on
inside the castle, not just what goes on outside it. He wants, essentially, to go
everywhere he can and learn everything he can."
       Musashi realized this lecture probably meant little to Jōtarō, but he felt it
necessary to be honest with the child and not give him halfway answers. He
showed no impatience at the boy's many questions, and as they walked along, he
continued to give thoughtful and serious replies.
       After they had seen what there was to see of the exterior of Koyagyū
Castle, as the Main House was properly known, and taken a good look all around
the valley, they started back to the inn.
       There was only one inn, but it was a large one. The road was a section of
the Iga highroad, and many people making pilgrimages to the Jōruriji or
Kasagidera stayed the night here. In the evening, ten or twelve packhorses were
always to be found tied to the trees near the entrance or under the front eaves.
       The maid who followed them to their room asked, "Have you been out for
a walk?" In her mountain-climbing trousers, she might have been mistaken for a
boy, were it not for her girl's red obi. Without waiting for an answer, she said,
"You can take your bath now, if you like."
       Musashi started for the bathroom, while Jōtarō, sensing that here was a
new friend of his own age, asked, "What's your name?"
      "I don't know," answered the girl.
      "You must be crazy if you don't know your own name."
      "It's Kocha."
      "That's a funny name." Jōtarō laughed.
      "What's funny about it?" demanded Kocha, striking him with her fist.
      "She hit me!" yelled Jōtarō.

       From the folded clothing on the floor of the anteroom, Musashi knew there
were other people in the bath. He took off his own clothes and opened the door
into the steamy bathroom. There were three men, talking jovially, but catching
sight of his brawny body, they stopped as though a foreign element had been
introduced into their midst.
       Musashi slipped into the communal bath with a contented sigh, his six-foot
frame causing the hot water to overflow. For some reason, this startled the three
men, and one of them looked straight at Musashi, who had leaned his head
against the edge of the pool and closed his eyes.
       Gradually they took up their conversation where they had left off. They
were washing themselves outside the pool; the skin on their backs was white and
their muscles pliant. They were apparently city people, for their manner of
speech was polished and urbane.
      "What was his name—the samurai from the House of Yagyū?"
      "I think he said it was Shōda Kizaemon."
      "If Lord Yagyū sends a retainer to convey a refusal to a match, he can't be
      as good as he's said to be."
       "According to Shōda, Sekishūsai's retired and never fights anyone
anymore. Do you suppose that's the truth, or was he just making it up?"
       "Oh, I don't think it's true. It's much more likely that when he heard the
second son of the House of Yoshioka was challenging him, he decided to play it
safe."
       "Well, he was tactful at least, sending fruit and saying he hoped we'd enjoy
our stopover."
       Yoshioka? Musashi lifted his head and opened his eyes. Having overheard
someone mention Denshichirō's trip to Ise while he was at the Yoshioka School,
Musashi assumed that the three men were on their way back to Kyoto. One of
them must be Denshichirō. Which one?
       "I don't have much luck with baths," thought Musashi ruefully. "First
Osugi tricked me into taking a bath, and now, again with no clothes on, I run into
one of the Yoshiokas. He's bound to have heard of what happened at the school.
If he knew my name was Miyamoto, he'd be out that door and back with his
sword in no time."
       But the three paid him no attention. To judge from their talk, as soon as
they had arrived they had sent a letter to the House of Yagyū. Apparently

Sekishūsai had had some connection with Yoshioka Kempō back in the days
when Kempō was tutor to the shōguns. No doubt because of this, Sekishūsai
could not let Kempō's son go away without acknowledging his letter and had
therefore sent Shōda to pay a courtesy call at the inn.
        In response to this, the best these city youths could say was that Sekishūsai
was "tactful," that he had decided to "play it safe," and that he couldn't be "as
good as he's said to be." They seemed exceedingly satisfied with themselves, but
Musashi thought them ridiculous. In contrast to what he had seen of Koyagyū
Castle and the enviable state of the area's inhabitants, they appeared to have
nothing better to offer than clever conversation.
        It reminded him of a saying about the frog at the bottom of a well, unable
to see what was going on in the outside world. Sometimes, he was thinking, it
works the other way around. These pampered young sons of Kyoto were in a
position to see what was happening at the center of things and to know what was
going on everywhere, but it would not have occurred to them that while they
were watching the great open sea, somewhere else, at the bottom of a deep well,
a frog was steadily growing larger and stronger. Here in Koyagyū, well away
from the country's political and economic center, sturdy samurai had for decades
been leading a healthy rural life, preserving the ancient virtues, correcting their
weak points and growing in stature.
        With the passage of time, Koyagyū had produced Yagyū Muneyoshi, a
great master of the martial arts, and his son Lord Munenori of Tajima, whose
prowess had been recognized by Ieyasu himself. And there were also
Muneyoshi's older sons, Gorōzaemon and Toshikatsu, famous throughout the
land for their bravery, and his grandson Hyōgo Toshitoshi, whose prodigious
feats had earned him a highly paid position under the renowned general Katō
Kiyomasa of Higo. In fame and prestige, the House of Yagyū did not rank with
the House of Yoshioka, but in terms of ability, the difference was a thing of the
past. Denshichirō and his companions were blind to their own arrogance.
Musashi, nevertheless, felt a little sorry for them.
        He went over to a corner where water was piped into the room. Undoing
his headband, he seized a handful of clay and began scrubbing his scalp. For the
first time in many weeks, he treated himself to the luxury of a good shampoo.
       In the meantime, the men from Kyoto were finishing their bath. "Ah, that
       felt good."
       "Indeed it did. Now why don't we have some girls in to pour our sake for
       us?"

      "Splendid idea! Splendid!"
       The three finished drying themselves and left. After a thorough wash and
another soak in the hot water, Musashi too dried off, tied up his hair, and went
back to his room. There he found the boyish-looking Kocha in tears.
      "What happened to you?"
      "It's that boy of yours, sir. Look where he hit me!"
      "That's a lie!" Jōtarō cried angrily from the opposite corner.
      Musashi was about to scold him, but Jōtarō protested, "The dope said you
      were weak!"
      "That's not true. I didn't."
      "You did too!"
       "Sir, I didn't say you or anybody else was weak. This brat started bragging
about how you were the greatest swordsman in the country, because you'd killed
dozens of rōnin at Hannya Plain, and I said there wasn't anybody in Japan better
with the sword than the lord of this district, and then he started slapping me on
the cheeks."
       Musashi laughed. "I see. He shouldn't have done that, and I'll give him a
good scolding. I hope you'll forgive us. Jō!" he said sternly.
      "Yes, sir," said the boy, still sulking.
      "Go take a bath!"
      "I don't like to take baths."
       "Neither do I," Musashi lied. "But you, you're so sweaty you stink." "I'll go
swimming in the river tomorrow morning."
       The boy was becoming more and more stubborn as he grew more
accustomed to Musashi, but Musashi did not really mind. In fact, he rather liked
this side of Jōtarō. In the end, the boy did not go to the bath.
       Before long Kocha brought the dinner trays. They ate in silence, Jōtarō and
the maid glaring at each other, while she served the meal.
       Musashi was preoccupied with his private objective of meeting Sekishūsai.
Considering his own lowly status, perhaps this was asking too much, but maybe,
just maybe, it was possible.
       "If I'm going to match arms with anybody," thought Musashi, "it should be
with somebody strong. It's worth risking my life to see whether I can overcome
the great Yagyū name. There's no use in following the Way of the Sword if I
haven't the courage to try."
       Musashi was aware that most people would laugh outright at him for
entertaining the idea. Yagyū, though not one of the more prominent daimyō, was

the master of a castle, his son was at the shōgun's court, and the whole family
was steeped in the traditions of the warrior class. In the new age now dawning,
they were riding the crest of the times.
      "This will be the true test," thought Musashi, who, even as he ate his rice,
was preparing himself for the encounter.
