The Yoshioka School


      The life of today, which cannot know the morrow ...
      In the Japan of the early seventeenth century, an awareness of the fleeting
nature of life was as common among the masses as it was among the elite. The
famous general Oda Nobunaga, who laid the foundations for Toyotomi
Hideyoshi's unification of Japan, summed up this view in a short poem:


      Man's fifty years
      Are but a phantom dream
      In his journey through
      The eternal transmigrations.


Defeated in a skirmish with one of his own generals, who attacked him in a
sudden fit of revenge, Nobunaga committed suicide in Kyoto at the age of forty-
eight.
       By 1605, some two decades later, the incessant warring among the daimyō
was essentially over, and Tokugawa Ieyasu had ruled as shōgun for two years.
The lanterns on the streets of Kyoto and Osaka glowed brightly, as they had in
the best days of the Ashikaga shogunate, and the prevailing mood was
lighthearted and festive.
       But few were certain the peace would last. More than a hundred years of
civil strife had so colored people's view of life that they could only regard the
present tranquility as fragile and ephemeral. The capital was thriving, but the
tension of not knowing how long this would last whetted the people's appetite
for merrymaking.
       Though still in control, Ieyasu had officially retired from the position of
shōgun. While still strong enough to control the other daimyō and defend the
family's claim to power, he had passed on his title to his third son, Hidetada. It
was rumored that the new shōgun would visit Kyoto soon to pay his respects to
the emperor, but it was common knowledge that his trip west meant more than a
courtesy call. His greatest potential rival, Toyotomi Hideyori, was the son of

Hideyoshi, Nobunaga's able successor. Hideyoshi had done his best to ensure
that power remain with the Toyotomis until Hideyori was old enough to exercise
it, but the victor at Sekigahara was Ieyasu.
       Hideyori still resided at Osaka Castle, and although Ieyasu, rather than
have him done away with, permitted him to enjoy a substantial annual income,
he was aware that Osaka was a major threat as a possible rallying point of
resistance. Many feudal lords knew this too, and hedging their bets, paid equal
court to both Hideyori and the shōgun. It was often remarked that the former had
enough castles and gold to hire every masterless samurai, or rōnin, in the
country, if he wanted to.
      Idle speculation on the country's political future formed the bulk of gossip
      in the Kyoto air.
      "War's bound to break out sooner or later."
      "It's just a matter of time."
      "These street lanterns could be snuffed out tomorrow."
      "Why worry about it? What happens happens."
      "Let's enjoy ourselves while we can!"
      The bustling nightlife and booming pleasure quarters were tangible
      evidence that much of the populace were doing just that.
       Among those so inclined was a group of samurai now turning a corner into
Shijō Avenue. Beside them ran a long wall of white plaster, leading to an
impressive gate with an imposing roof. A wooden plaque, blackened with age,
announced in barely legible writing: "Yoshioka Kempō of Kyoto. Military
Instructor to the Ashikaga Shōguns."
       The eight young samurai gave the impression of having practiced sword
fighting all day without respite. Some bore wooden swords in addition to the two
customary steel ones, and others were carrying lances. They looked tough, the
kind of men who'd be the first to see bloodshed the moment a clash of arms
erupted. Their faces were as hard as stone and their eyes threatening, as if always
on the brink of exploding in a rage.
      "Young Master, where are we headed tonight?" they clamored, surrounding
      their teacher.
      "Anywhere but where we were last night," he replied gravely.
      "Why? Those women were falling all over you! They barely looked at the
      rest of us."
       "Maybe he's right,' another man put in. "Why don't we try someplace new,
where no one knows the Young Master or any of the rest of us." Shouting and

carrying on among themselves, they seemed totally consumed by the question of
where to go drinking and whoring.
       They moved on to a well-lit area along the banks of the Kamo River. For
years the land had been vacant and weed-filled, a veritable symbol of wartime
desolation, but with the coming of peace, its value had shot up. Scattered here
and there were flimsy houses, red and pale yellow curtains hanging crookedly in
their doorways, where prostitutes plied their trade. Girls from Tamba Province,
white powder smeared carelessly on their faces, whistled to prospective
customers; unfortunate women who had been purchased in droves plunked on
their shamisens, a newly popular instrument, as they sang bawdy songs and
laughed among themselves.
       The Young Master's name was Yoshioka Seijūrō, and a tasteful dark brown
kimono draped his tall frame. Not long after they'd entered the brothel district,
he looked back and said to one of his group, "Tōji, buy me a basket hat."
      "The kind that hides your face, I suppose?"
      "Yes."
      "You don't need one here, do you?" Gion Tōji replied.
       "I wouldn't have asked for one if I didn't!" Seijūrō snapped impatiently. "I
don't care to have people see the son of Yoshioka Kempō walking about in a
place like this."
       Tōji laughed. "But it just attracts attention. All the women around here
know that if you hide your face under a hat, you must be from a good family and
probably a rich one. Of course, there are other reasons why they won't leave you
alone, but that's one of them."
       Tōji was, as usual, both teasing and flattering his master. He turned and
ordered one of the men to get the hat and stood waiting for him to thread his way
through the lanterns and merrymakers. The errand accomplished, Seijūrō donned
the hat and began to feel more relaxed.
       "In that hat," commented Tōji, "you look more than ever like the
fashionable man about town." Turning to the others, he continued his flattery
indirectly. "See, the women are all leaning out their doors to get a good look at
him."
       Tōji's sycophancy aside, Seijūrō did cut a fine figure. With two highly
polished scabbards hanging from his side, he exuded the dignity and class one
would expect from the son of a well-to-do family. No straw hat could stop the
women from calling out to him as he walked.
       "Hey there, handsome! Why hide your face under that silly hat?" "Come

on, over here! I want to see what's under there."
       "Come on, don't be shy. Give us a peek."
       Seijūrō reacted to these teasing come-ons by trying to look even taller and
more dignified. It had only been a short time since Tōji had first persuaded him
to set foot in the district, and it still embarrassed him to be seen there. Born the
eldest son of the famous swordsman Yoshioka Kemp& he had never lacked
money, but he had remained until recently unacquainted with the seamier side of
life. The attention he was getting made his pulse race. He still felt enough shame
to hide, though as a rich man's spoiled son he'd always been something of a
show-off. The flattery of his entourage, no less than the flirting of the women,
bolstered his ego like sweet poison.
       "Why, it's the master from Shijō Avenue!" one of the women exclaimed.
"Why are you hiding your face? You're not fooling anybody."
       "How does that woman know who I am?" Seijūrō growled at Tōji,
pretending to be offended.
       "That's easy," the woman said before Tōji could open his mouth.
"Everybody knows that the people at the Yoshioka School like to wear that dark
brown color. It is called 'Yoshioka dye,' you know, and it's very popular around
here."
       "That's true, but as you say, a lot of people wear it."
       "Yes, but they don't have the three-circle crest on their kimonos."
       Seijūrō looked down at his sleeve. "I must be more careful," he said as a
hand from behind the lattice reached out and latched onto the garment.
       "My, my," said Tōji. "He hid his face but not his crest. He must have
wanted to be recognized. I don't think we can really avoid going in here now."
       "Do whatever you want," said Seijūrō, looking uncomfortable, "but make
her let go of my sleeve."
       "Let go, woman," Tōji roared. "He says we're coming in!"
       The students crowded in under the shop curtain. The room they entered
was so tastelessly decorated with vulgar pictures and messily arranged flowers
that it was difficult for Seijūrō to feel at ease. The others, however, took no
notice of the shabbiness of their surroundings.
       "Bring on the sake!" Tōji demanded, also ordering assorted tidbits.
       After the food arrived, Ueda Ryōhei, who was Tōji's match with a sword,
cried, "Bring on the women!" The order was given in exactly the same surly tone
Tōji had used to order their food and drink.
       "Hey, old Ueda says bring the women!" the others chorused, mimicking

Ryōhei's voice.
      "I don't like being called old," Ryōhei said, scowling. "It's true I've been at
the school longer than any of you, but you won't find a gray hair on my head."
     "You probably dye it."
     "Whoever said that come forward and drink a cup as punishment!" "Too
     much trouble. Throw it here!"
     The sake cup sailed through the air.
     "Here's the repayment!" And another cup flew through the air. "Hey,
     somebody dance!"
     Seijūrō called out, "You dance, Ryōhei! Dance, and show us how young
     you are!"
      "I am prepared, sir. Watch!" Going to the corner of the veranda, he tied a
maid's red apron around the back of his head, stuck a plum blossom in the knot
and seized a broom.
      "Why, look! He's going to do the Dance of the Hida Maiden! Let's hear the
song too, Tōji"
      He invited them all to join in, and they began rapping rhythmically on the
dishes with their chopsticks, while one man clanged the fire tongs against the
edge of the brazier.


      Across the bamboo fence, the bamboo fence, the bamboo fence,
      I caught sight of a long-sleeved kimono,
      A long-sleeved kimono in the snow. . . .


      Drowned in applause after the first verse, Tōji bowed out, and the women
took up where he had left off, accompanying themselves on shamisen.


           The girl I saw yesterday
           Is not here today.
           The girl I see today,
           She'll not be here tomorrow.
           I know not what the morrow will bring,
           I want to love her today.

       In one corner, a student held up a huge bowl of sake to a comrade and said,
"Say, why don't you down this in one gulp?"
       "No, thanks."
       "No, thanks? You call yourself a samurai, and you can't even put this
away?" "Sure I can. But if I do, you have to too!"
       "Fair enough!"
       The contest began, with them gulping like horses at the trough and
dribbling sake out of the corners of their mouths. An hour or so later a couple of
them started vomiting, while others were reduced to immobility and blankly
staring bloodshot eyes.
       One, whose customary bluster became more strident the more he drank,
declaimed, "Does anyone in this country besides the Young Master truly
understand the techniques of the Kyōhachi Style? If there is—hic—I want to
meet him. . . . Oops!"
       Another stalwart, seated near Seijūrō, laughed and stammered through his
hiccups. "He's piling on the flattery because the Young Master's here. There are
other schools of martial arts besides the ones here in Kyoto, and the Yoshioka
School's not necessarily the greatest anymore. In Kyoto alone, there's the school
of Toda Seigen in Kurotani, and there's Ogasawara Genshinsai in Kitano. And
let's not forget Hō Ittōsai in Shirakawa, even though he doesn't take students."
       "And what's so wonderful about them?"
       "I mean, we shouldn't get the idea we're the only swordsmen in the world."
"You simple-minded bastard!" shouted a man whose pride had been offended.
"Come forward!"
       "Like this?" retorted the critic, standing up.
       "You're a member of this school, and you're belittling Yoshioka Kempō's
style?"
       "I'm not belittling it! It's just that things aren't what they used to be in the
old days when the master taught the shōguns and was considered the greatest of
swordsmen. There are far more people practicing the Way of the Sword these
days, not only in Kyoto but in Edo, Hitachi, Echizen, the home provinces, the
western provinces, Kyushu—all over the country. Just because Yoshioka Kempō
was famous doesn't mean the Young Master and all of us are the greatest
swordsmen alive. It's just not true, so why kid ourselves?"
       "Coward! You pretend to be a samurai, but you're afraid of other schools!"
       "Who's afraid of them? I just think we should guard ourselves against

becoming complacent."
       "And who are you to be giving warnings?" With this the offended student
punched the other in the chest, knocking him down.
       "You want to fight?" growled the fallen man.
       "Yeah, I'm ready."
       The seniors, Gion Tōji and Ueda Ryōhei, intervened. "Stop it, you two!"
Jumping to their feet, they pulled the two men apart and tried to smooth their
ruffled feathers.
       "Quiet down now!"
       "We all understand how you feel."
       A few more cups of sake were poured into the combatants, and presently
things were back to normal. The firebrand was once again eulogizing himself
and the others, while the critic, his arm draped around Ryōhei, pleaded his case
tearfully. "I only spoke up for the sake of the school," he sobbed. "If people keep
spouting flattery, Yoshioka Kempō's reputation will eventually be ruined.
Ruined, I tell you!"
      Seijūrō alone remained relatively sober. Noticing this, Tōji said, "You're not
      enjoying the party, are you?"
      "Unh. Do you think they really enjoy it? I wonder."
      "Sure; this is their idea of a good time."
      "I don't see how, when they carry on like that."
       "Look, why don't we go someplace quieter? I've had enough of this too."
Seijūrō, looking much relieved, quickly assented. "I'd like to go to the place we
were at last night."
       "You mean the Yomogi?"
       "Yes."
       "That's much nicer. I thought all along you wanted to go there, but it
would've been a waste of money to take along this bunch of oafs. That's why I
steered them here—it's cheap."
       "Let's sneak out, then. Ryōhei can take care of the rest."
       "Just pretend you're going to the toilet. I'll come along in a few minutes.",
Seijūrō skillfully disappeared. No one noticed.
       Outside a house not far away, a woman stood on tiptoe, trying to hang a
lantern back on its nail. The wind had blown out the candle, and she had taken it
down to relight it. Her back was stretched out under the eaves, and her recently
washed hair fell loosely around her face. Strands of hair and the shadows from
the lantern made lightly shifting patterns on her outstretched arms. A hint of

plum blossoms floated on the evening breeze.
      "Okō! Shall I hang it for you?"
      "Oh, it's the Young Master," she said with surprise.
      "Wait a minute." When the man came forward, she saw that it was not
      Seijūrō but Tōji.
      "Will that do?" he asked.
      "Yes, that's fine. Thank you."
       But Tōji squinted at the lantern, decided it was crooked, and rehung it. It
was amazing to Okō how some men, who would flatly refuse to lend a hand in
their own homes, could be so helpful and considerate when visiting a place like
hers. Often they would open or close the windows for themselves, get out their
own cushions, and do a dozen other little chores they'd never dream of doing
under their own roofs.
      Tōji, pretending not to have heard, showed his master indoors.
      Seijūrō, as soon as he was seated, said, "It's awfully quiet."
      "I'll open the door to the veranda," said Tōji.
       Below the narrow veranda rippled the waters of the Takase River. To the
south, beyond the small bridge at Sanjō Avenue, lay the broad compound of the
Zuisenin, the dark expanse of Teramachi—the "Town of Temples"—and a field
of miscanthus. This was near Kayahara, where Toyotomi Hideyoshi's troops had
slain the wife, concubines and children of his nephew, the murderous regent
Hidetsugu, an event still fresh in many people's memory.
       Tōji was getting nervous. "It's still too quiet. Where are the women hiding?
They don't seem to have any other customers tonight." He fidgeted a bit. "I
wonder what's taking Okō so long. She hasn't even brought us our tea." When
his impatience made him so jumpy he could no longer sit still, he got up to go
see why the tea hadn't been served.
       As he stepped out onto the veranda, he nearly collided with Akemi, who
was carrying a gold-lacquered tray. The little bell in her obi tinkled as she
exclaimed, "Be careful! You'll make me spill the tea!"
      "Why are you so late with it? The Young Master's here; I thought you liked
      him."
      "See, I've spilled some. It's your fault. Go fetch me a rag."
      "Ha! Pretty sassy, aren't you? Where's Okō?"
      "Putting on her makeup, of course."
      "You mean she's not finished yet?"
      "Well, we were busy during the daytime."

     "Daytime? Who came during the daytime?"
     "That's none of your business. Please let me by."
     He stepped aside and Akemi entered the room and greeted the guest. "Good
     evening. It was good of you to come."
     Seijūrō, feigning nonchalance, looked aside and said, "Oh, it's you, Akemi.
     Thanks for last night." He was embarrassed.
     From the tray she took a jar that looked like an incense burner and placed
     on it a pipe with a ceramic mouthpiece and bowl.
     "Would you like a smoke?" she asked politely.
     "I thought tobacco was recently banned."
     "It was, but everybody still smokes anyway."
     "All right, I'll have some."
     "I'll light it for you."
      She took a pinch of tobacco from a pretty little mother-of-pearl box and
stuffed it into the tiny bowl with her dainty fingers. Then she put the pipe to his
mouth. Seijūrō, not being in the habit of smoking, handled it rather awkwardly.
      "Hmm, bitter, isn't it?" he said. Akemi giggled. "Where did Tōji go?" "He's
probably in Mother's room."
      "He seems fond of Okō. At least, it looks that way to me. I suspect he
comes here without me sometimes. Does he?" Akemi laughed but did not
answer. "What's funny about that? I think your mother rather likes him too."
      "I really wouldn't know!"
      "Oh, I'm sure of it! Absolutely sure! It's a cozy arrangement, isn't it? Two
happy couples—your mother and Tōji, you and me."
      Looking as innocent as he could, he put his hand on top of Akemi's, which
was resting on her knee. Primly, she brushed it away, but this only made Seijūrō
bolder. As she started to rise, he put his arm around her thin waist and drew her
to him.
     "You don't have to run away," he said. "I'm not going to hurt you."
     "Let go of me!" she protested.
     "All right, but only if you sit down again."
     "The sake . . . I'll just go and get some."
     "I don't want any."
     "But if I don't bring it, Mother'll get angry."
     "Your mother's in the other room, having a nice chat with Tōji"
      He tried to rub his cheek against her lowered face, but she turned her head
away and called frantically for help. "Mother! Mother!" He released her and she

flew toward the back of the house.
       Seijūrō was becoming frustrated. He was lonely but didn't really want to
force himself on the girl. Not knowing what to do with himself, he grunted out
loud, "I'm going home," and started tramping down the outer corridor, his face
growing more crimson with each step.
       "Young Master, where are you going? You're not leaving, are you?"
Seemingly from out of nowhere, Okō appeared behind him and rushed down the
hall. As she put her arm about him, he noticed that her hair was in place and her
makeup was in order. She summoned Tōji to the rescue, and together they
persuaded Seijūrō to go back and sit down. Okō brought sake and tried to cheer
him up, then Tōji led Akemi back into the room. When the girl saw how
crestfallen Seijūrō was, she flashed a smile at him.
      "Akemi, pour the Young Master some sake."
      "Yes, Mother," she said obediently.
      "You see how she is, don't you?" said Okō. "Why does she always want to
      act like a child?"
      "That's her charm—she's young," said Tōji, sliding his cushion up closer to
      the table.
      "But she's already twenty-one."
      "Twenty-one? I didn't think she was that old. She's so small she looks about
      sixteen or seventeen!"
       Akemi, suddenly as full of life as a minnow, said, "Really? That makes me
happy, because I'd like to be sixteen all my life. Something wonderful happened
to me when I was sixteen."
       "What?"
       "Oh," she said, clasping her hands to her breast. "I can't tell anybody about
it, but it happened. When I was sixteen. Do you know what province I was in
then? That was the year of the Battle of Sekigahara."
       With a menacing look, Okō said, "Chatterbox! Stop boring us with your
talk. Go and get your shamisen."
       Pouting slightly, Akemi stood up and went for her instrument. When she
returned, she started playing and singing a song, more intent, it seemed, upon
amusing herself than upon pleasing the guests.


      Tonight then,
      If it's to be cloudy,

      Let it be cloudy,
      Hiding the moon
      I can see only through my tears.


     Breaking off, she said, "Do you understand, Tōji?" "I'm not sure. Sing
some more."


      Even in the darkest night
      I do not lose my way.
      But oh! How you fascinate me!


       "She is twenty-one, after all," said Tōji.
       Seijūrō, who had been sitting silently with his forehead resting on his
hand, came to life and said, "Akemi, let's have a cup of sake together."
       He handed her the cup and filled it from the sake warmer. She drank it
down without flinching and briskly handed him back the cup to drink from.
       Somewhat surprised, Seijūrō said, "You know how to drink, don't you."
       Finishing off his draft, he offered her another, which she accepted and
downed with alacrity. Apparently dissatisfied with the cup's size, she took out a
larger one and for the next half hour matched him drink for drink.
       Seijūrō marveled. There she was, looking like a sixteen-year-old girl, with
lips that had never been kissed and an eye that shrank with shyness, and yet she
was putting away her sake like a man. In that tiny body, where did it all go?
       "You may as well give up now," Okō said to Seijūrō. "For some reason the
child can drink all night without getting drunk. The best thing to do is to let her
play the shamisen."
      "But this is fun!" said Seijūrō, now thoroughly enjoying himself.
      Sensing something strange in his voice, Tōji asked, "Are you all right? Sure
      you haven't had too much?"
      "It doesn't matter. Say, Tōji, I may not go home tonight!"
      "That's all right too," replied Tōji. "You can stay as many nights as you
      wish—can't he, Akemi?"
       Tōji winked at Okō, then led her off to another room, where he began
whispering rapidly. He told Okō that with the Young Master in such high spirits,

he would certainly want to sleep with Akemi, and that there would be trouble if
Akemi refused; but that, of course, a mother's feelings were the most important
thing of all in cases like this—or in other words, how much?
       "Well?" Tōji demanded abruptly.
       Okō put her finger to her thickly powdered cheek and thought.
       "Make up your mind!" urged Tōji. Drawing closer to her, he said, "It's not
a bad match, you know. He's a famous teacher of the martial arts, and his family
has lots of money. His father had more disciples than anybody else in the
country. What's more, he's not married yet. Any way you look at it, it's an
attractive offer."
       "Well, I think so too, but—"
       "But nothing. It's settled! We'll both spend the night."
       There was no light in the room, and Tōji casually rested his hand on Okō's
shoulder. At just that moment, there was a loud noise in the next room back.
"What was that?" asked Tōji. "Do you have other customers?"
       Okō nodded silently, then put her moist lips to his ear and whispered,
"Later." Trying to appear casual, the two went back to Seijūrō's room, only to
find him alone and sound asleep.
       Tōji, taking the adjacent room, stretched out on the pallet. He lay there,
drumming his fingers on the tatami, waiting for Okō. She failed to appear.
Eventually his eyelids grew heavy and he drifted off to sleep. He woke up quite
late the next morning with a resentful look on his face.
       Seijūrō had already arisen and was again drinking in the room overlooking
the river. Both Okō and Akemi looked bright and cheerful, as though they'd
forgotten about the night before. They were coaxing Seijūrō into some sort of
promise.
       "Then you'll take us?"
       "All right, we'll go. Put together some box lunches and bring some sake."
       They were talking about the Okuni Kabuki, which was being performed on
the riverbank at Shijō Avenue. This was a new kind of dance with words and
music, the current rage in the capital. It had been invented by a shrine maiden
named Okuni at the Izumo Shrine, and its popularity had already inspired many
imitations. In the busy area along the river, there were rows of stages where
troupes of women performers competed to attract audiences, each trying to
achieve a degree of individuality by adding special provincial dances and songs
to their repertoire. The actresses, for the most part, had started out as women of
the night; now that they had taken to the stage, however, they were summoned to

perform in some of the greatest mansions in the capital. Many of them took
masculine names, dressed in men's clothing, and put on stirring performances as
valiant warriors.
       Seijūrō sat staring out the door. Beneath the small bridge at Sanjō Avenue,
women were bleaching cloth in the river; men on horseback were passing back
and forth over the bridge.
       "Aren't those two ready yet?" he asked irritably. It was already past noon.
Sluggish from drink and tired of waiting, he was no longer in the mood for
Kabuki.
       Tōji, still smarting from the night before, was not his usual ebullient self.
"It's fun to take women out," he grumbled, "but why is it that just when you're
ready to leave, they suddenly start worrying about whether their hair is just right
or their obi straight? What a nuisance!"
       Seijūrō's thoughts turned to his school. He seemed to hear the sound of
wooden swords and the clack of lance handles. What were his students saying
about his absence? No doubt his younger brother, Denshichirō, was clicking his
tongue in disapproval.
      "Tōji," he said, "I don't really want to take them to see Kabuki. Let's go
      home."
      "After you've already promised?"
      "Well . . ."
      "They were so thrilled! They'll be furious if we back out. I'll go and hurry
      them up."
       On his way down the hallway, Tōji glanced into a room where the
women's clothes were strewn about. He was surprised to see neither of them.
"Where can they have got to?" he wondered aloud.
       They weren't in the adjoining room either. Beyond that was another
gloomy little room, sunless and musty with the odor of bedclothes. Tōji opened
the door and was greeted with an angry roar: "Who's there?"
       Jumping back a step, Tōji peered into the dark cubbyhole; it was floored
with old tattered mats and was as different from the pleasant front rooms as night
is from day. Sprawled on the floor, a sword handle lying carelessly across his
belly, was an unkempt samurai whose clothing and general appearance left no
doubt that he was one of the rōnin often seen roaming the streets and byways
with nothing to do. The soles of his dirty feet stared Tōji in the face. Making no
effort to get up, he lay there in a stupor.
       Tōji said, "Oh, I'm sorry. I didn't know there was a guest in here."

       "I'm not a guest!" the man shouted toward the ceiling. He reeked of sake,
and though Tōji had no idea who he was, he was sure he wanted nothing more to
do with him.
      "Sorry to bother you," he said quickly, and turned to leave.
      "Hold on there!" the man said roughly, raising himself up slightly. "Close
      the door behind you!"
      Startled by his rudeness, Tōji did as he was told and left.
       Almost immediately Tōji was replaced by Okō. Dressed to kill, she was
obviously trying to look the great lady. As though tut-tutting a child, she said to
Matahachi, "Now what are you so angry about?"
      Akemi, who was just behind her mother, asked, "Why don't you come with
      us?"
      "Where?"
      "To see the Okuni Kabuki."
       Matahachi's mouth twisted with repugnance. "What husband would be
seen in the company of a man who's chasing after his wife?" he asked bitterly.
       Okō had the feeling that cold water had been thrown in her face. Her eyes
lighting up with anger, she said, "What are you talking about? Are you implying
that there's something going on between Tōji and me?"
      "Who said anything was going on?"
      "You just said as much."
      Matahachi made no reply.
       "And you're supposed to be a man!" Though she hurled the words at him
contemptuously, Matahachi maintained his sullen silence. "You make me sick!"
she snapped. "You're always getting jealous over nothing! Come, Akemi. Let's
not waste our time on this madman."
       Matahachi reached out and caught her skirt. "Who're you calling a
madman? What do you mean, talking to your husband that way?"
       Okō pulled free of him. "And why not?" she said viciously. "If you're a
husband, why don't you act like one? Who do you think's keeping you in food,
you worthless layabout!"
       "Heh!"
       "You've hardly earned anything since we left Omi Province. You've just
been living off me, drinking your sake and loafing. What've you got to complain
about?"
       "I told you I'd go out and work! I told you I'd even haul stones for the
castle wall. But that wasn't good enough for you. You say you can't eat this, you

can't wear that, you can't live in a dirty little house—there's no end to what you
can't put up with. So instead of letting me do honest labor, you start this rotten
teahouse. Well, stop it, I tell you, stop it!" he shouted. He began to shake.
      "Stop what?"
      "Stop running this place."
      "And if I did, what would we eat tomorrow?"
      "I can make enough for us to live on, even hauling rocks. I could manage
      for the three of us."
       "If you're so eager to carry rocks or saw wood, why don't you just go
away? Go on, be a laborer, anything, but if you do, you can live by yourself! The
trouble with you is that you were born a clod, and you'll always be a clod. You
should have stayed in Mimasaka! Believe me, I'm not begging you to stay. Feel
free to leave anytime you want!"
       While Matahachi made an effort to hold back his angry tears, Okō and
Akemi turned their backs on him. But even after they were out of sight, he stood
staring at the doorway. When Okō had hidden him at her house near Mount
Ibuki, he'd thought he was lucky to have found someone who would love and
take care of him. Now, however, he felt that he might as well have been captured
by the enemy. Which was better, after all? To be a prisoner, or to become the pet
of a fickle widow and cease to be a real man? Was it worse to languish in prison
than to suffer here in the dark, a constant object of a shrew's scorn? He had had
great hopes for the future, and he had let this slut, with her powdered face and
her lascivious sex, pull him down to her level.
       "The bitch!" Matahachi trembled with anger. "The rotten bitch!"
       Tears welled up from the bottom of his heart. Why, oh, why, hadn't he
returned to Miyamoto? Why hadn't he gone back to Otsū? His mother was in
Miyamoto. His sister too, and his sister's husband, and Uncle Gon. They'd all
been so good to him.
       The bell at the Shippōji would be ringing today, wouldn't it? Just as it rang
every day. And the Aida River would be flowing along its course as usual,
flowers would be blooming on the riverbank, and the birds would be heralding
the arrival of spring.
      "What a fool I am! What a crazy, stupid fool!" Matahachi pounded his head
      with his fists.
      Outside, mother, daughter and the two overnight guests strolled along the
      street, chatting merrily.
      "It's just like spring."

       "It ought to be. It's almost the third month."
       "They say the shogun will come to the capital soon. If he does, you two
       ladies should take in a lot of money, eh?"
       "Oh, no, I'm sure we won't."
       "Why? Don't the samurai from Edo like to play?"
       "They're much too uncouth—"
       "Mother, isn't that the music for the Kabuki? I hear bells. And a flute too."
       "Listen to the child! She's always like this. She thinks she's already at the
       theater!"
       "But, Mother, I can hear it."
       "Never mind that. Carry the Young Master's hat for him."
        The footsteps and voices drifted into the Yomogi. Matahachi, with eyes
still red with fury, stole a look out the window at the happy foursome. He found
the sight so humiliating he once again plopped down on the tatami in the dark
room, cursing himself.
        "What are you doing here? Have you no pride left? How can you let things
go on this way? Idiot! Do something!" The speech was addressed to himself, his
anger at Okō eclipsed by his indignation at his own craven weakness.
        "She said get out. Well, get out!" he argued. "There's no reason to sit here
gnashing your teeth. You're only twenty-two. You're still young. Get out and do
something on your own."
        He felt he couldn't abide staying in the empty, silent house another minute,
yet for some reason, he couldn't leave. His head ached with confusion. He
realized that living the way he had been for the past few years, he had lost the
ability to think clearly. How had he stood it? His woman was spending her
evenings entertaining other men, selling them the charms she had once lavished
on him. He couldn't sleep nights, and in the daytime he was too dispirited to go
out. Brooding here in this dark room, there was nothing to do but drink.
        And all, he thought, for that aging whore!
        He was disgusted with himself. He knew that the only way out of his
agony was to kick the whole ugly business sky high and return to the aspirations
of his younger days. He must find the way he had lost.
        And yet . . . and yet .. .
        Some mysterious attraction bound him. What sort of evil spell was it that
held him here? Was the woman a demon in disguise? She would curse him, tell
him to go away, swear he was nothing but trouble to her, and then in the middle
of the night she would melt like honey and say it had all been a joke, she really

hadn't meant any of it. And even if she was nearly forty, there were those lips—
those bright red lips that were as appealing as her daughter's.
       This, however, was not the whole story. In the final analysis, Matahachi
did not have the courage to let Okō and Akemi see him working as a day laborer.
He had grown lazy and soft; the young man who dressed in silk and could
distinguish Nada sake from the local brew by its taste was a far cry from the
simple, rugged Matahachi who had been at Sekigahara. The worst aspect was
that living this strange life with an older woman had robbed him of his
youthfulness. In years he was still young, but in spirit he was dissolute and
spiteful, lazy and resentful.
       "But I'll do it!" he vowed. "I'll get out now!" Giving himself a final angry
blow on the head, he jumped to his feet, shouting, "I'll get out of here this very
day!"
       As he listened to his own voice, it suddenly sank in that there was no one
around to hold him back, nothing that actually bound him to this house. The only
thing he really owned and could not leave behind was his sword, and this he
quickly slipped into his obi. Biting his lips, he said determinedly, "After all, I am
a man."
       He could have marched out the front door waving his sword like a
victorious general, but by force of habit he jumped into his dirty sandals and left
by the kitchen door.
       So far, so good. He was out of doors! But now what? His feet came to a
halt. He stood motionless in the refreshing breeze of early spring. It was not the
light dazzling his eyes that kept him from moving. The question was, where was
he headed?
       At that moment it seemed to Matahachi that the world was a vast, turbulent
sea on which there was nothing to cling to. Aside from Kyoto, his experience
encompassed only his village life and one battle. As he puzzled over his
situation, a sudden thought sent him scurrying like a puppy back through the
kitchen door.
       "I need money," he said to himself. "I'll certainly have to have some
money."
       Going straight to Okō's room, he rummaged through her toilet boxes, her
mirror stand, her chest of drawers, and everywhere else he could think of. He
ransacked the place but found no money at all. Of course, he should have
realized Okō wasn't the type of woman who would fail to take precautions
against something like this.

       Frustrated, Matahachi flopped down on the clothes that still lay on the
floor. The scent of Okō lingered like a thick mist about her red silk under-robe,
her Nishijin obi and her Momoyama-dyed kimono. By now, he reflected, she
would be at the open-air theater by the river, watching the Kabuki dances with
Tōji at her side. He formed an image of her white skin and that provoking,
coquettish face.
       "The evil slut!" he cried. Bitter and murderous thoughts arose from his
very bowels.
       Then, unexpectedly, he had a painful recollection of Otsū. As the days and
months of their separation added up, he had grown at last to understand the
purity and devotion of this girl who had promised to wait for him. He would
gladly have bowed down and lifted his hands in supplication to her, if he'd
thought she would ever forgive him. But he had broken with Otsū, abandoned
her in such a way that it would be impossible to face her again.
       "All for the sake of that woman," he thought ruefully. Now that it was too
late, everything was clear to him; he should never have let Okō know that Otsū
existed. When Okō had first heard of the girl, she had smiled a little smile and
pretended not to mind in the slightest, but in fact, she was consumed with
jealousy. Afterward, whenever they quarreled, she would raise the subject and
insist that he write a letter breaking his engagement. And when he finally gave in
and did so, she had brazenly enclosed a note in her own obviously feminine
hand, and callously had the missive delivered by an impersonal runner.
       "What must Otsū think of me?" groaned Matahachi sorrowfully. The
image of her innocent girlish face came to his mind—a face full of reproach.
Once again he saw the mountains and the river in Mimasaka. He wanted to call
out to his mother, to his relatives. They had been so good. Even the soil now
seemed to have been warm and comforting.
       "I can never go home again!" he thought. "I threw all of it away for ... for
..." Enraged afresh, he dumped Okō's clothes out of the clothes chests and ripped
them apart, strewing strips and pieces all over the house.
      Slowly he became aware of someone calling from the front door.
      "Pardon me," said the voice. "I'm from the Yoshioka School. Are the Young
      Master and Tōji here?"
      "How should I know?" replied Matahachi gruffly.
       "They must be here! I know it's rude to disturb them when they've gone off
to have some fun, but something terribly important has happened. It involves the
good name of the Yoshioka family."

       "Go away! Don't bother me!"
       "Please, can't you at least give them a message? Tell them that a
swordsman named Miyamoto Musashi has appeared at the school, and that, well,
none of our people can get the better of him. He's waiting for the Young Master
to return—refuses to budge until he's had a chance to face him. Please tell them
to hurry home!"
       "Miyamoto? Miyamoto?"
