The Peony


       The old man's dignity had grown with the years, until now he resembled
nothing so much as a majestic crane, while at the same time retaining the
appearance and manner of the well-bred samurai. His teeth were sound, his eyes
wonderfully sharp. "I'll live to be a hundred," he frequently assured everyone.
       Sekishūsai firmly believed this himself. "The House of Yagyū has always
been long-lived," he liked to point out. "The ones who died in their twenties and
thirties were killed in battle; all the others lived well beyond sixty." Among the
countless wars he himself had taken part in were several major ones, including
the revolt of the Miyoshi and the battles marking the rise and fall of the
Matsunaga and Oda families.
       Even if Sekishūsai had not been born in such a family, his way of life, and
especially his attitude after he reached old age, gave reason to believe he would
live to reach a hundred. At the age of forty-seven, he had decided for personal
reasons to give up warfare. Nothing since had altered this resolution. He had
turned a deaf ear to the entreaties of the shōgun Ashikaga Yoshiaki, as well as to
repeated requests from Nobunaga and Hideyoshi to join forces with them.
Though he lived almost in the shadow of Kyoto and Osaka, he refused to
become embroiled in the frequent battles of those centers of power and intrigue.
He preferred to remain in Yagyū, like a bear in a cave, and tend his fifteen-
thousand-bushel estate in such a way that it could be handed on to his
descendants in good condition. Sekishūsai once remarked, "I've done well to
hold on to this estate. In this uncertain age, when leaders rise today and fall
tomorrow, it's almost incredible that this one small castle has managed to survive
intact."
       This was no exaggeration. If he had supported Yoshiaki, he would have
fallen victim to Nobunaga, and if he had supported Nobunaga, he might well
have run afoul of Hideyoshi. Had he accepted Hideyoshi's patronage, he would
have been dispossessed by Ieyasu after the Battle of Sekigahara.
       His perspicacity, which people admired, was one factor, but to survive in
such turbulent times, Sekishūsai had to have an inner fortitude lacking in the
ordinary samurai of his time; they were all too apt to side with a man one day
and shamelessly desert him the next, to look after their own interests—with no

thought to propriety or integrity—or even to slaughter their own kinsmen should
they interfere with personal ambitions.
       "I am unable to do things like that," Sekishūsai said simply. And he was
telling the truth. However, he had not renounced the Art of War itself. In the
alcove of his living room hung a poem he had written himself. It said:


           I have no clever method
           For doing well in life.
           I rely only
           On the Art of War.
           It is my final refuge.


       When he was invited by Ieyasu to visit Kyoto, Sekishūsai found it
impossible not to accept and emerged from decades of serene seclusion to make
his first visit to the shōgun's court. With him he took his fifth son, Munenori,
who was twenty-four, and his grandson Hyōgo, then only sixteen. Ieyasu not
only confirmed the venerable old warrior in his landholdings but asked him to
become tutor in the martial arts to the House of Tokugawa. Sekishūsai, declining
the honor on grounds of age, requested that Munenori be appointed in his stead,
and this met with Ieyasu's approval.
       The legacy Munenori carried with him to Edo encompassed more than a
superb ability in martial arts, for his father had also passed on to him a
knowledge of the higher plane of the Art of War that enables a leader to govern
wisely.
       In Sekishūsai's view, the Art of War was certainly a means of governing
the people, but it was also a means of controlling the self. This he had learned
from Lord Kōizumi, who, he was fond of saying, was the protective deity of the
Yagyū household. The certificate Lord Kōizumi had given him to attest to his
mastery of the Shinkage Style of swordsmanship was always kept on a shelf in
Sekishūsai's room, along with a four-volume manual of military techniques
presented him by his lordship. On anniversaries of Lord Kōizumi's death,
Sekishūsai never neglected to place an offering of food before these treasured
possessions.
       In addition to descriptions of the hidden-sword techniques of the Shinkage
Style, the manual contained illustrative pictures, all by the hand of Lord Kōizumi

himself. Even in his retirement, Sekishūsai took pleasure in rolling the scrolls
out and looking through them. He was constantly surprised to rediscover how
skillfully his teacher had wielded the brush. The pictures showed people fighting
and fencing in every conceivable position and stance. When Sekishūsai looked at
them, he felt that the swordsmen were about to descend from heaven to join him
in his little mountain house.
       Lord Kōizumi had first come to Koyagyū Castle when Sekishūsai was
thirty-seven or thirty-eight and still brimming with military ambition. His
lordship, together with two nephews, Hikida Bungorō and Suzuki Ihaku, was
going around the country seeking experts in the martial arts, and one day he
arrived at the Hōzōin. This was in the days when In'ei often called at Koyagyū
Castle, and In'ei told Sekishūsai about the visitor. That was the beginning of their
relationship.
       Sekishūsai and Kōizumi held matches for three days in a row. In the first
bout, Kōizumi announced where he would attack, then proceeded to take the
match doing exactly as he had said.
       The same thing happened the second day, and Sekishūsai, his pride
injured, concentrated on figuring out a new approach for the third day.
       Upon seeing his new stance, Kōizumi merely said, "That won't do. If you
are going to do that, I will do this." Without further ado, he attacked and
defeated Sekishūsai for the third time. From that day on, Sekishūsai gave up the
egotistic approach to swordsmanship; as he later recalled, it was on that occasion
that he first had a glimpse of the true Art of War.
       At Sekishūsai's strong urging, Lord Kōizumi remained at Koyagyū for six
months, during which time Sekishūsai studied with the single-minded devotion
of a neophyte. When they finally parted, Lord Kōizumi said, "My way of
swordsmanship is still imperfect. You are young, and you should try to carry it to
perfection." He then gave Sekishūsai a Zen riddle: "What is sword fighting
without a sword?"
       For a number of years, Sekishūsai pondered this, considering it from every
angle and finally arriving at an answer that satisfied him. When Lord Kōizumi
came to visit again, Sekishūsai greeted him with clear, untroubled eyes and
suggested that they have a match. His lordship scrutinized him for a moment,
then said, "No, it would be useless. You have discovered the truth!"
       He then presented Sekishūsai with the certificate and the four-volume
manual, and in this fashion the Yagyū Style was born. This in turn gave birth to
Sekishūsai's peaceful way of life in his old age.

      That Sekishūsai lived in a mountain house was due to his no longer liking
the imposing castle with all its elaborate trappings. Despite his almost Taoist
love of seclusion, he was happy to have the company of the girl Shōda
Kizaemon had brought to play the flute for him, for she was thoughtful, polite
and never a nuisance. Not only did her playing please him immensely, but she
added a welcome touch of youth and femininity to the household. Occasionally
she would talk of leaving, but he would always tell her to stay a little longer.


       Putting the finishing touches on the single peony he was arranging in an
Iga vase, Sekishūsai asked Otsū, "What do you think? Is my flower arrangement
alive?"
       Standing just behind him, she said, "You must have studied flower
arranging very hard."
       "Not at all. I'm not a Kyoto nobleman, and I've never studied either flower
arranging or the tea ceremony under a teacher."
      "Well, it looks as though you had."
      "I use the same method with flowers that I use with the sword."
      Otsū looked surprised. "Can you really arrange flowers the way you use the
      sword?"
       "Yes. You see, it's all a matter of spirit. I have no use for rules—twisting
the flowers with your fingertips or choking them at the neck. The point is to have
the proper spirit—to be able to make them seem alive, just as they were when
they were picked. Look at that! My flower isn't dead."
       Otsū felt that this austere old man had taught her many things she needed
to know, and since it had all begun with a chance meeting on the highroad, she
felt she had been very lucky. "I'll teach you the tea ceremony," he would say. Or:
"Do you compose Japanese poems? If you do, teach me something about the
courtly style. The Man'yōshū is all well and good, but living here in this
secluded place, I'd rather hear simple poems about nature."
       In return, she did little things for him that no one else thought of. He was
delighted, for example, when she made him a little cloth cap like the tea masters
wore. He kept it on his head much of the time now, treasuring it as though there
were nothing finer anywhere. Her flute playing, too, pleased him immensely, and
on moonlit nights, the hauntingly beautiful sound of her flute often reached as
far as the castle itself.
       While Sekishūsai and Otsū were discussing the flower arrangement,

Kizaemon came quietly to the entrance of the mountain house and called to
Otsū. She came out and invited him in, but he hesitated.
      "Would you let his lordship know I've just come back from my errand?" he
      asked.
      Otsū laughed. "That's backwards, isn't it?"
      "Why?"
      Y•
       "You're the chief retainer here. I'm only an outsider, called in to play the
flute. You're much closer to him than I. Shouldn't you go to him directly, rather
than through me?"
       "I suppose you're right, but here in his lordship's little house, you're
special. Anyway, please give him the message." Kizaemon, too, was pleased by
the way things had turned out. He had found in Otsū a person whom his master
liked very much.
       Otsū returned almost immediately to say that Sekishūsai wanted Kizaemon
to come in. Kizaemon found the old man in the tea room, wearing the cloth cap
Otsū had made.
      "Are you back already?" asked Sekishūsai.
      "Yes. I called on them and gave them the letter and the fruit, just as you
      instructed."
      "Have they gone?"
       "No. No sooner had I arrived back here than a messenger came from the
inn with a letter. It said that since they'd come to Yagyū, they didn't want to leave
without seeing the dōjō. If possible, they'd like to come tomorrow. They also
said they'd like to meet you and pay their respects."
       "Impudent boors! Why must they be such a nuisance?" Sekishūsai looked
extremely annoyed. "Did you explain that Munenori is in Edo, Hyōgo in
Kumamoto, and that there's no one else around?"
       "I did."
       "I despise people like that. Even after I send a messenger to tell them I
can't see them, they try to push their way in."
       "I don't know what—"
       "It would appear that Yoshioka's sons are as shiftless as they're said to be."
"The one at the Wataya is Denshichirō. He didn't impress me."
       "I'd be surprised if he did. His father was a man of considerable character.
When I went to Kyoto with Lord Kōizumi, we saw him two or three times and
drank some sake together. It appears that the house has gone downhill since then.

The young man seems to think that being Kempō's son gives him the right not to
be refused entry here, and so he's pressing his challenge. But from our
viewpoint, it makes no sense to accept the challenge and then send him away
beaten."
       "This Denshichirō seems to have a good deal of self-confidence. If he
wants so badly to come, perhaps I myself should take him on."
       "No, don't even consider it. These sons of famous people usually have a
high opinion of themselves; moreover, they're prone to try and twist things to
their own advantage. If you were to beat him, you can depend on it that he'd try
to destroy our reputation in Kyoto. As far as I'm concerned, it makes no
difference, but I don't want to burden Munenori or Hyōgo with something like
that."
       "What shall we do, then?"
       "The best thing would be to appease him in some way, make him feel he's
being treated the way a son from a great house should be treated. Maybe it was a
mistake to send a man to see him." Shifting his gaze to Otsū, he continued: "I
think a woman would be better. Otsū is probably just the right person."
       "All right," she said. "Do you want me to go now?"
       "No, there's no hurry. Tomorrow morning will do."
       Sekishūsai quickly wrote a simple letter, of the sort a tea master might
compose, and handed it to Otsū, with a peony like the one he had put in the vase.
"Give these to him, and tell him that you've come in my stead because I have a
cold. Let's see what his answer is."


     The next morning, Otsū draped a long veil over her head. Although veils
were already out of style in Kyoto, even among the higher classes, the upper-and
middle-class women in the provinces still prized them.
    At the stable, which was in the outer grounds of the castle, she asked to
    borrow a horse.
    The keeper of the stables, who was busy cleaning up, asked, "Oh, are you
    going somewhere?"
    "Yes, I have to go to the Wataya on an errand for his lordship."
    "Shall I go with you?"
    "There's no need for that."
    "Will you be all right?"
    "Of course. I like horses. The ones I used to ride in Mimasaka were wild, or

      nearly so."
       As she rode off, the reddish-brown veil floated in the wind behind her. She
rode well, holding the letter and the slightly weary peony in one hand and deftly
handling the horse with the other. Farmers and workers in the field waved to her,
for in the short time she had been here, she had already become fairly well
known among the local people, whose relations with Sekishūsai were much
friendlier than were usual between lord and peasants. The farmers here all knew
that a beautiful young woman had come to play the flute for their lord, and their
admiration and respect for him were extended to Otsū.
      Arriving at the Wataya, she dismounted and tied her horse to a tree in the
      garden.
      "Welcome!" called Kocha, coming out to greet her. "Are you staying for the
      night?"
      "No, I've just come from Koyagyū Castle with a message for Yoshioka
      Denshichirō. He's still here, isn't he?"
      "Would you wait a moment, please?"
       In the brief time Kocha was gone, Otsū created a mild stir among the
travelers who were noisily putting on their leggings and sandals and strapping
their luggage to their backs.
       "Who's that?" asked one.
       "Who do you suppose she's come to see?"
       Otsū's beauty, a graceful elegance seldom encountered in the country, kept
the departing guests whispering and ogling until she followed Kocha out of
sight.
       Denshichirō and his companions, having drunk until late the night before,
had only just arisen. When told that a messenger had come from the castle, they
assumed it would be the man who had come the day before. The sight of Otsū
with her white peony came as a distinct surprise.
      "Oh, please forgive the room! It's a mess."
      With abjectly apologetic faces, they straightened their kimonos and sat
      properly and a little stiffly on their knees.
      "Please, come in, come in."
       "I've been sent by the lord of Koyagyū Castle," Otsū said simply, placing
the letter and the peony before Denshichirō. "Would you be so kind as to read
the letter now?"
       "Ah, yes ... this is the letter? Yes, I'll read it."
       He opened the scroll, which was no more than a foot long. Written in thin

ink, suggestive of the light flavor of tea, it said: "Forgive me for sending my
greetings in a letter, rather than meeting you in person, but unfortunately I have a
slight cold. I think a pure white peony will give you more pleasure than the
runny nose of an old man. I send the flower by the hand of a flower, with the
hope that you will accept my apology. My ancient body rests outside the
everyday world. I hesitate to show my face. Please smile with pity on an old
man."
       Denshichirō sniffed with contempt and rolled up the letter. "Is that all?" he
asked.
       "No, he also said that although he'd like to have a cup of tea with you, he
hesitates to invite you to his house, because there is no one there but warriors
ignorant of the niceties of tea. Since Munenori is away in Edo, he feels that the
serving of the tea would be so crude as to bring laughter to the lips of people
from the imperial capital. He asked me to beg your pardon, and tell you that he
hopes to see you on some future occasion."
       "Ha, ha!" exclaimed Denshichirō, putting on a suspicious face. "If I
understand you correctly, Sekishūsai is under the impression we were looking
forward to observing the niceties of the tea ceremony. To tell the truth, being
from samurai families, we don't know anything about tea. Our intention was to
inquire personally after Sekishūsai's health and persuade him to give us a lesson
in swordsmanship."
       "He understands that perfectly, of course. But he's spending his old age in
retirement and has acquired the habit of expressing many of his thoughts in
terms of tea."
       In obvious disgust, Denshichirō replied, "Well, he hasn't left us any choice
but to give up. Please tell him that if we come again, we'd like to see him." He
handed the peony back to Otsū.
       "Don't you like it? He thought it might cheer you up on the road. He said
you might hang it in the corner of your palanquin, or if you're on horseback,
attach it to your saddle."
       "He meant it to be a souvenir?" Denshichirō lowered his eyes as though
insulted, then with a sour face said, "This is ridiculous! You can tell him we have
peonies of our own in Kyoto!"
       If that was the way he felt, Otsū decided, there was no point in pressing the
gift on him. Promising to deliver his message, she took her leave as delicately as
she would have removed the bandage from an open sore. In ill temper, her hosts
barely acknowledged her departure.

       Once in the hallway, Otsū laughed softly to herself, glanced at the shiny
black floor leading to the room where Musashi was staying, and turned in the
other direction.
       Kocha came out of Musashi's room and ran to catch up with her. "Are you
leaving already?" she asked.
       "Yes, I've finished what I came to do."
       "My, that was fast, wasn't it?" Looking down at Otsū's hand, she asked, "Is
that a peony? I didn't know they bloomed white."
       "Yes. It's from the castle garden. You can have it, if you like."
       "Oh, please," said Kocha, stretching out her hands.
       After bidding Otsū good-bye, Kocha went to the servants' quarters and
showed everyone the flower. Since no one was inclined to admire it, she went
disappointedly back to Musashi's room.
       Musashi, sitting by the window with his chin in his hands, was gazing in
the direction of the castle and thinking hard about his objective: how could he
manage, first, to meet Sekishūsai and, second, to overcome him with his sword?
      "Do you like flowers?" Kocha asked as she entered.
      "Flowers?"
      She showed him the peony.
      "Hmm. It's nice."
      "Do you like it?"
      "Yes."
      "It's supposed to be a peony, a white peony."
      "Is it? Why don't you put it in that vase over there."
      "I don't know how to arrange flowers. You do it."
       "No, you do it. It's better to do it without thinking how it's going to look."
"Well, I'll go and get some water," she said, taking the vase out with her.
Musashi's eye happened to light on the cut end of the peony stem. His head
       tilted in surprise, though he couldn't pinpoint what it was that attracted his
       attention.
       Casual interest had become intent scrutiny by the time Kocha came back.
She put the vase in the alcove and tried sticking the peony in it, but with poor
results.
       "The stem's too long," said Musashi. "Bring it here; I'll cut it. Then when
you stand it up, it'll look natural."
       Kocha brought the flower over and held it up to him. Before she knew
what had happened, she had dropped the flower and burst into tears. Small

wonder, for in that split second Musashi had whipped out his short sword,
uttered a vigorous cry, slashed through the stem between her hands, and
resheathed his sword. To Kocha, the glint of steel and the sound of the sword
snapping back into its scabbard seemed simultaneous.
       Making no attempt to comfort the terrified girl, Musashi picked up the
piece of stem he had cut off and began comparing one end of it with the other.
He seemed completely absorbed. Finally, taking notice of her distraught state, he
apologized and patted her on the head.
      Once he had coaxed her out of her tears, he asked, "Do you know who cut
      this flower?"
      "No. It was given to me."
      "By whom?"
      "A person from the castle."
      "One of the samurai?"
      "No, it was a young woman."
      "Mm. Then you think the flower came from the castle?"
      "Yes, she said it did."
       "I'm sorry I scared you. If I buy you some cakes later, will you forgive me?
In any case, the flower should be just right now. Try putting it in the vase." "Will
this do?"
       "Yes, that's fine."
       Kocha had taken an instant liking to Musashi, but the flash of his sword
had chilled her to the marrow. She left the room, unwilling to return until her
duties made it absolutely unavoidable.
       Musashi was far more fascinated by the eight-inch piece of stem than by
the flower in the alcove. He was sure the first cut had not been made with either
scissors or a knife. Since peony stems are lithe and supple, the cut could only
have been made with a sword, and only a very determined stroke would have
made so clean a slice. Whoever had done it was no ordinary person. Although he
himself had just tried to duplicate the cut with his own sword, upon comparing
both ends he was immediately aware that his own cut was by far the inferior one.
It was like the difference between a Buddhist statue carved by an expert and one
made by a craftsman of average skill.
       He asked himself what it could mean. "If a samurai working the castle
garden can make a cut like this, then the standards of the House of Yagyū must
be even higher than I thought."
       His confidence suddenly deserted him. "I'm nowhere near ready yet."

        Gradually, however, he recovered from this feeling. "In any event, the
Yagyū people are worthy opponents. If I should lose, I can fall at their feet and
accept defeat with good grace. I've already decided I'm willing to face anything,
even death." Sitting and mustering up his courage, he felt himself grow warmer.
        But how was he to go about it? Even if a student arrived at his doorstep
with a proper introduction, it seemed unlikely Sekishūsai would agree to a
match. The innkeeper had said as much. And with Munenori and Hyōgo both
away, there was no one to challenge but Sekishūsai himself.
        He again tried to devise a way of gaining admittance to the castle. His eyes
returned to the flower in the alcove, and the image of someone the flower
unconsciously reminded him of began to take form. Seeing Otsū's face in his
mind's eye quieted his spirit and soothed his nerves.
        Otsū herself was well on her way back to Koyagyū Castle when suddenly
she heard a raucous shout behind her. She turned to see a child emerging from a
clump of trees at the base of a cliff. He was clearly coming after her, and since
children of the area were much too timid to accost a young woman such as
herself, she brought her horse to a halt out of sheer curiosity.
        Jōtarō was stark naked. His hair was wet, and his clothes were rolled up in
a ball under his arm. Unabashed by his nudity, he said, "You're the lady with the
flute. Are you still staying here?" Having eyed the horse with distaste, he looked
directly at Otsū.
        "It's you!" she exclaimed, before averting her eyes in embarrassment. "The
little boy who was crying on the Yamato highroad."
       "Crying? I wasn't crying!"
       "Never mind. How long have you been here?"
       "Just came the other day."
       "By yourself?"
       "No; with my teacher."
       "Oh, that's right. You did say you were studying swordsmanship, didn't
       you? What are you doing with your clothes off?"
        "You don't think I'd jump in the river with my clothes on, do you?" "River?
But the water must be freezing. People around here would laugh at the idea of
going swimming this time of year."
       "I wasn't swimming; I was taking a bath. My teacher said I smelled sweaty,
       so I went to the river."
       Otsū chuckled. "Where are you staying?"
       "At the Wataya."

     "Why, I've just come from there."
     "Too bad you didn't come to see us. How about coming back with me
     now?" "I can't now. I have an errand to do."
     "Well, bye!" he said, turning to go.
     "Jōtarō, come see me at the castle sometime."
     "Could I really?"
      The words were barely out before Otsū began to regret them, but she said,
"Yes, but make sure you don't come dressed the way you are now."
      "If that's the way you feel about it, I don't want to go. I don't like places
where they make a fuss about things."
      Otsū felt relieved and still had a smile on her face when she rode back
through the castle gate. After returning her horse to the stable, she went to report
to Sekishūsai.
      He laughed and said, "So they were angry! Fine! Let them be angry.
There's nothing they can do about it." After a moment, he seemed to remember
something else. "Did you throw the peony away?" he asked.
      She explained that she had given it to the maid at the inn, and he nodded
his approval. "Did the Yoshioka boy take the peony in his hand and look at it?"
he asked.
     "Yes. When he read the letter."
     "And?"
     "He just handed it back to me."
     "He didn't look at the stem?"
     "Not that I noticed."
     "He didn't examine it, or say anything about it?"
     "No."
      "It's just as well that I refused to meet him. He's not worth meeting. The
House of Yoshioka might just as well have ended with Kempō.


       The Yagyū dōjō could quite appropriately be described as grand. Situated
in the outer grounds of the castle, it had been rebuilt around the time when
Sekishūsai was forty, and the sturdy timber used in its construction gave it an air
of indestructibility. The gloss of the wood, acquired over the years, seemed to
echo the rigors of the men who had undergone training here, and the building
was ample enough to have served as samurai barracks during times of war.
       "Lightly! Not with your sword point! With your gut, your gut!" Shōda

Kizaemon, seated on a slightly elevated platform and clad in under robe and
hakama, was roaring angry instructions at two aspiring swordsmen. "Do it again!
You don't have it right at all!"
       The target of Kizaemon's scolding was a pair of Yagyū samurai, who
though dazed and bathed in sweat fought doggedly on. Stances were taken,
weapons readied, and the two came together again like fire against fire.
       "A-o-o-oh!"
       "Y-a-a-ah!"
       At Yagyū, beginners were not allowed to use wooden swords. Instead they
used a staff devised specifically for the Shinkage Style. A long, thin leather bag
filled with strips of bamboo, it was, in effect, a leather stick, with no handle or
sword guard. Though less dangerous than a wooden sword, it could still remove
an ear or turn a nose into a pomegranate. There were no restrictions regarding
what part of the body a combatant could attack. Knocking down an opponent by
striking him horizontally in the legs was permitted, and there was no rule against
hitting a man once he was down.
       "Keep it up! Keep at it! Same as last time!" Kizaemon drove the students
on.
       The custom here was not to let a man quit until he was ready to drop.
Beginners were driven especially hard, never praised and treated to no small
amount of verbal abuse. Because of this, the average samurai knew that entering
into the service of the House of Yagyū was not something to be taken lightly.
Newcomers rarely lasted long, and the men now serving under Yagyū were the
result of very careful sifting. Even the common foot soldiers and stablemen had
made some progress in the study of swordsmanship.
       Shōda Kizaemon was, needless to say, an accomplished swordsman,
having mastered the Shinkage Style at an early age and, under the tutelage of
Sekishūsai himself, gone on to learn the secrets of the Yagyū Style. To this he
had added some personal techniques of his own, and he spoke proudly now of
the "True Shōda Style."
       The Yagyū horse trainer, Kimura Sukekurō, was also an adept, as was
Murata Yozō, who, though employed as keeper of the storehouse, was said to
have been a good match for Hyōgo. Debuchi Magobei, another relatively minor
official, had studied swordsmanship from childhood and wielded a powerful
weapon indeed. The Lord of Echizen had tried to persuade Debuchi to come into
his service, and the Tokugawas of Kii had tried to lure Murata away, but both of
them had chosen to stay in Yagyū, though the material benefits were fewer.

      The House of Yagyū, now enjoying a peak in its fortunes, was turning out
a seemingly unending stream of great swordsmen. By the same token, the Yagyū
samurai were not recognized as swordsmen until they had proved their ability by
surviving the merciless regimen.
      "You there!" called Kizaemon to a guard passing by outside. He had been
surprised by the sight of Jōtarō following along after the soldier.
      "Hello!" shouted Jōtarō in his friendliest manner.
      "What are you doing inside the castle?" asked Kizaemon sternly.
      "The man at the gate brought me in," answered Jōtarō, truthfully enough.
"He did, did he?" To the guard, he said, "Why did you bring this boy here?" "He
said he wanted to see you."
     "Do you mean to say you brought this child here on his word alone? .. .
     Boy.
     "Yes, sir."
     "This is no playground. Get along with you."
     "But I didn't come to play. I brought a letter from my teacher."
     "From your teacher? Didn't you say he was one of those wandering
     students?"
     "Look at the letter, please."
     "I don't need to."
     "What's the matter? Can't you read?"
     Kizaemon snorted.
     "Well, if you can read, read it."
     "You're a tricky brat. The reason I said I don't need to read it is that I
     already know what it says."
     "Even so, wouldn't it be more polite to read it?"
      "Student warriors swarm here like mosquitoes and maggots. If I took time
to be polite to all of them, I wouldn't be able to do anything else. I feel sorry for
you, however, so I'll tell you what the letter says. All right?
      "It says that the writer would like to be allowed to see our magnificent
dōjō, that he would like to bask, even for a minute, in the shadow of the greatest
master in the land, and that for the sake of all those successors who will follow
the Way of the Sword, he would be grateful to have a lesson bestowed upon him.
I imagine that's about the long and short of it."
      Jōtarō's eyes rounded. "Is that what the letter says?"
      "Yes, so I don't need to read it, do I? Let it not be said, however, that the
House of Yagyū coldheartedly turns away those who call upon it." He paused

and continued, as though having rehearsed the speech: "Ask the guard there to
explain everything to you. When student warriors come to this house, they enter
through the main gate and proceed to the middle gate, to the right of which is a
building called the Shin'indō. It is identified by a hanging wooden plaque. If they
apply to the caretaker there, they are free to rest for a time, and there are
facilities for them to stop over for a night or two. When they leave, they are
given a small amount of money to help them along the way. Now, the thing for
you to do is to take this letter to the caretaker at the Shin'indō—understand?"
      "No!" said Jōtarō. He shook his head and raised his right shoulder slightly.
      "Listen, sir!"
      "Well?"
      "You shouldn't judge people by their appearance. I'm not the son of a
      beggar!"
      "I do have to admit you have a certain knack with words."
       "Why don't you just take a look at the letter? It may say something
completely different from what you think. What would you do then? Would you
let me cut off your head?"
       "Hold on a minute!" Kizaemon laughed, and his face, with its red mouth
behind his spiky beard, looked like the inside of a broken chestnut burr. "No, you
can't cut my head off."
      "Well, then, look at the letter."
      "Come in here."
      "Why?" Jōtarō had a sinking feeling he'd gone too far.
      "I admire your determination not to let your master's message go
      undelivered. I'll read it."
      "And why shouldn't you? You're the highest-ranking official in the House of
      Yagyū, aren't you?"
       "You wield your tongue superbly. Let's hope you can do the same with
your sword when you grow up." He broke the seal of the letter and silently read
Musashi's message. As he read, his face became serious. When he was finished,
he asked, "Did you bring anything along with this letter?"
       "Oh, I forgot! I was to give you this too." Jōtarō quickly pulled the peony
stem from his kimono.
       Silently, Kizaemon examined both ends of the stem, looking somewhat
puzzled. He could not completely understand the meaning of Musashi's letter.
       It explained how the inn's maid had brought him a flower, which she said
had come from the castle, and that upon examining the stem, he had discovered

that the cut had been made by "no ordinary person." The message continued:
"After putting the flower in a vase, I sensed some special spirit about it, and I
feel that I simply have to find out who made that cut. The question may seem
trivial, but if you would not mind telling me which member of your household
did it, I would appreciate your sending a reply by the boy who delivers my
letter."
       That was all—no mention of the writer's being a student, no request for a
bout.
       "What an odd thing to write," thought Kizaemon. He looked at the peony
stem again, again examining both ends closely, but without being able to discern
whether one end differed from the other.
       "Murata!" he called. "Come look at this. Can you see any difference
between the cuts at the ends of this stem? Does one cut, perhaps, seem to be
keener?"
       Murata Yozō looked at the stem this way and that, but had to confess that
he saw no difference between the two cuts.
       "Let's show it to Kimura."
       They went to the office at the back of the building and put the problem to
their colleague, who was as mystified as they were. Debuchi, who happened to
be in the office at the time, said, "This is one of the flowers the old lord himself
cut the day before yesterday. Shōda, weren't you with him at the time?"
       "No, I saw him arranging a flower, but I didn't see him cut it."
       "Well, this is one of the two he cut. He put one in the vase in his room and
had Otsū take the other one to Yoshioka Denshichirō with a letter."
       "Yes, I remember that," said Kizaemon, as he started to read Musashi's
letter again. Suddenly, he looked up with startled eyes. "This is signed 'Shimmen
Musashi,"' he said. "Do you suppose this Musashi is the Miyamoto Musashi who
helped the Hōzōin priests kill all that riffraff at Hannya Plain? It must be!"
       Debuchi and Murata passed the letter back and forth, rereading it. "The
handwriting has character," said Debuchi.
       "Yes," mumbled Murata. "He seems to be an unusual person."
       "If what the letter says is true," Kizaemon said, "and he really could tell
that this stem had been cut by an expert, then he must know something we don't.
The old master cut it himself, and apparently that's plain to someone whose eyes
really see."
       Debuchi said, "Mm. I'd like to meet him.... We could check on this and
also get him to tell us what happened at Hannya Plain." But rather than commit

himself on his own, he asked Kimura's opinion. Kimura pointed out that since
they weren't receiving any shugyōsha, they couldn't have him as a guest at the
practice hall, but there was no reason why they couldn't invite him for a meal
and some sake at the Shin'indō. The irises were already in bloom there, he noted,
and the wild azaleas were about to blossom. They could have a little party and
talk about swordsmanship and things like that. Musashi would in all likelihood
be glad to come, and the old lord certainly wouldn't object if he heard about it.
      Kizaemon slapped his knee and said, "That's a splendid suggestion."
      "It'll be a party for us too," Murata added. "Let's send him an answer right
      away."
      As he sat down to write the reply, Kizaemon said, "The boy's outside. Have
      him come in."
       A few minutes earlier, Jōtarō had been yawning and grumbling, "How can
they be so slow," when a big black dog caught his scent and came over to sniff at
him. Thinking he had found a new friend, Jōtarō spoke to the dog and pulled him
forward by the ears.
       "Let's wrestle," he suggested, then hugged the dog and threw him over.
The dog went along with this, so Jōtarō caught him in his hands and threw him
two or three more times.
      Then, holding the dog's jaws together, he said, "Now, bark!"
      This made the dog angry. Breaking away, he caught the skirt of Jōtarō's
      kimono with his teeth and tugged tenaciously.
      Now it was Jōtarō's turn to get mad. "Who do you think I am? You can't do
      that!" he shouted.
       He drew his wooden sword and held it menacingly over his head. The dog,
taking him seriously, started barking loudly to attract the attention of the guards.
With a curse, Jōtarō brought his sword down on the dog's head. It sounded as
though he had hit a rock. The dog hurled himself against the boy's back, and
catching hold of his obi, brought him to the ground. Before he could get to his
feet, the dog was at him again, while Jōtarō frantically tried to protect his face
with his hands.
       He tried to escape, but the dog was right on his heels, the echoes of his
barking reverberating through the mountains. Blood began to ooze between the
fingers covering his face, and soon his own anguished howls drowned out those
of the dog.
