The Hōzōin


      Students of the martial arts invariably knew of the Hōzōin. For a man who
claimed to be a serious student to refer to it as just another temple was sufficient
reason for him to be regarded as an impostor. It was well known among the local
populace too, though, oddly enough, few were familiar with the much more
important Shōsōin Repository and its priceless collection of ancient art objects.
      The temple was located on Abura Hill in a large, dense forest of
cryptomeria trees. It was just the kind of place goblins might inhabit. Here, too,
were reminders of the glories of the Nara period—the ruins of a temple, the
Ganrin'in, and of the huge public bathhouse built by the Empress Kōmyō for the
poor—but today all that was left was a scattering of foundation stones peeking
out through the moss and weeds.
      Musashi had no difficulty getting directions to Abura Hill, but once there
he stood looking all around in bewilderment, for there were quite a few other
temples nestled in the forest. The cryptomerias had weathered the winter and
been bathed in the early spring rains, and their leaves were now at their darkest.
Above them one could make out in the approaching twilight the soft feminine
curves of Mount Kasuga. The distant mountains still lay in bright sunlight.
      Although none of the temples looked like the right one, Musashi went
from gate to gate inspecting the plaques on which their names were inscribed.
His mind was so preoccupied with the Hōzōin that when he saw the plaque of
the Ōzōin, he at first misread it, since only the first character, that for Ō, was
different. Although he immediately realized his mistake, he took a look inside
anyway. The Ōzōin appeared to belong to the Nichiren sect; as far as he knew,
the Hōzōin was a Zen temple having no connection with Nichiren.
     As he stood there, a young monk returning to the Ōzōin passed by him,
     staring suspiciously.
     Musashi removed his hat and said, "Could I trouble you for some
     information?"
     "What would you like to know?"
     "This temple is called the Ōzōin?"
     "Yes. That's what it says on the plaque."
     "I was told that the Hōzōin is on Abura Hill. Isn't it?"

      "It's just in back of this temple. Are you going there for a fencing bout?"
      "Yes."
      "Then let me give you some advice. Forget it."
      "Why?"
       "It's dangerous. I can understand someone born crippled going there to get
his legs straightened out, but I see no reason why anyone with good straight
limbs should go there and be maimed."
       The monk was well built and somehow different from the ordinary
Nichiren monk. According to him, the number of would-be warriors had reached
the point where even the Hōzōin had come to regard them as a nuisance. The
temple was, after all, a holy sanctuary for the light of the Buddha's Law, as its
name indicated. Its real concern was religion. The martial arts were only a
sideline, so to speak.
       Kakuzenbō In'ei, the former abbot, had often called on Yagyū Muneyoshi.
Through his association with Muneyoshi and with Lord Kōizumi of Ise,
Muneyoshi's friend, he had developed an interest in the martial arts and
eventually taken up swordsmanship as a pastime. From that he had gone on to
devise new ways of using the lance, and this, as Musashi already knew, was the
origin of the highly regarded Hōzōin Style.
       In'ei was now eighty-four years old and completely senile. He saw almost
no one. Even when he did receive a caller, he was unable to carry on a
conversation; he could only sit and make unintelligible movements with his
toothless mouth. He didn't seem to comprehend anything said to him. As for the
lance, he had forgotten about it completely.
       "And so you see," concluded the monk after explaining all this, "it
wouldn't do you much good to go there. You probably couldn't meet the master,
and even if you did, you wouldn't learn anything." His brusque manner made it
clear that he was eager to be rid of Musashi.
       Though aware he was being made light of, Musashi persisted. "I've heard
about In'ei, and I know what you've said about him is true. But I've also heard
that a priest named Inshun has taken over as his successor. They say he's still
studying but already knows all the secrets of the Hōzōin Style. According to
what I've heard, although he already has many students, he never refuses to give
guidance to anyone who calls on him."
       "Oh, Inshun," said the monk disdainfully. "There's nothing in those
rumors. Inshun is actually a student of the abbot of the Ōzōin. After In'ei began
to show his age, our abbot felt it would be a shame for the reputation of the

Hōzōin to go to waste, so he taught Inshun the secrets of lance fighting—what
he himself had learned from In'ei—and then saw to it that Inshun became abbot."
      "I see," said Musashi.
      "But you still want to go over there?"
      "Well, I've come all this distance. . . . "
      "Yes, of course."
      "You said it's behind here. Is it better to go around to the left or to the
      right?"
      "You don't have to go around. It's much quicker just to walk straight
      through our temple. You can't miss it."
       Thanking him, Musashi walked past the temple kitchen to the back of the
compound, which with its woodshed, a storehouse for bean paste and a vegetable
garden of an acre or so, very much resembled the area around the house of a
well-to-do farmer. Beyond the garden he saw the Hōzōin.
       Walking on the soft ground between rows of rape, radishes and scallions,
he noticed, off to one side, an old man hoeing vegetables. Hunched over his hoe,
he was looking intently at the blade. All Musashi could see of his face was a pair
of snow-white eyebrows, and save for the clank of the hoe against the rocks, it
was perfectly quiet.
       Musashi assumed that the old man must be a monk from the Ōzōin. He
started to speak, but the man was so absorbed in his work that it seemed rude to
disturb him.
       As he walked silently by, however, he suddenly became aware that the old
man was staring out of the corner of his eye at Musashi's feet. Although the other
man neither moved nor spoke, Musashi felt a terrifying force attack him—a
force like lightning splitting the clouds. This was no daydream. He actually felt
the mysterious power pierce his body and, terrified, he leaped into the air. He felt
hot all over, as if he'd just narrowly avoided a death blow from a sword or lance.
       Looking over his shoulder, he saw that the hunched back was still turned
toward him, the hoe continuing its unbroken rhythm. "What on earth was that all
about?" he wondered, dumbfounded by the power he'd been hit with.
       He found himself in front of the Hōzōin, his curiosity unabated. While
waiting for a servant to appear, he thought: "Inshun should still be a young man.
The young monk said In'ei was senile and had forgotten all about the lance, but I
wonder. . . ." The incident in the garden lingered in the back of his mind.
       He called out loudly two more times, but the only reply was an echo from
the surrounding trees. Noticing a large gong beside the entrance, he struck it.

Almost immediately an answering call came from deep inside the temple.
       A priest came to the door. He was big and brawny; had he been one of the
warrior-priests of Mount Hiei, he might well have been the commander of a
battalion. Accustomed as he was to receiving visits from people like Musashi
day in and day out, he gave him a brief glance and said, "You're a shugyōsha?"
      "Yes."
      "What are you here for?"
      "I'd like to meet the master."
       The priest said, "Come in," and gestured to the right of the entrance,
suggesting obliquely that Musashi should wash his feet first. There was a barrel
overflowing with water supplied by a bamboo pipe and, pointing this way and
that, about ten pairs of worn and dirty sandals.
       Musashi followed the priest down a wide dark corridor and was shown
into an anteroom. There he was told to wait. The smell of incense was in the air,
and through the window he could see the broad leaves of a plantain tree. Aside
from the offhand manner of the giant who'd let him in, nothing he saw indicated
there was anything unusual about this particular temple.
       When he reappeared, the priest handed him a registry and ink box, saying,
"Write down your name, where you studied, and what style you use." He spoke
as though instructing a child.
       The title on the registry was: "List of Persons Visiting This Temple to
Study. Steward of the Hōzōin." Musashi opened the book and glanced over the
names, each listed under the date on which the samurai or student had called.
Following the style of the last entry, he wrote down the required information,
omitting the name of his teacher.
       The priest, of course, was especially interested in that.
       Musashi's answer was essentially the one he'd given at the Yoshioka
School. He had practiced the use of the truncheon under his father, "without
working very hard at it." Since making up his mind to study in earnest, he had
taken as his teacher everything in the universe, as well as the examples set by his
predecessors throughout the country. He ended up by saying, "I'm still in the
process of learning."
       "Mm. You probably know this already, but since the time of our first
master, the Hōzōin has been celebrated everywhere for its lance techniques. The
fighting that goes on here is rough, and there are no exceptions. Before you go
on, perhaps you'd better read what's written at the beginning of the registry."
       Musashi picked up the book, opened it and read the stipulation, which he

had skipped over before. It said: "Having come here for the purpose of study, I
absolve the temple of all responsibility in the event that I suffer bodily injury or
am killed."
       "I agree to that," said Musashi with a slight grin—it amounted to no more
than common sense for anyone committed to becoming a warrior.
       "All right. This way."
       The dōjō was immense. The monks must have sacrificed a lecture hall or
some other large temple building in favor of having it. Musashi had never before
seen a hall with columns of such girth, and he also observed traces of paint, gold
foil and Chinese-white primer on the frame of the transom—things not to be
found in ordinary practice halls.
       He was by no means the only visitor. More than ten student-warriors were
seated in the waiting area, with a similar number of student-priests. In addition,
there were quite a few samurai who seemed to be merely observers. All were
tensely watching two lancers fighting a practice bout. No one even glanced
Musashi's way as he sat down in a corner.
       According to a sign on the wall, if anyone wanted to fight with real lances,
the challenge would be accepted, but the combatants now on the floor were
using long oak practice poles. A strike could, nevertheless, be extremely painful,
even fatal.
       One of the fighters was eventually thrown in the air, and as he limped back
to his seat in defeat, Musashi could see that his thigh had already swollen to the
size of a tree trunk. Unable to sit down, he dropped awkwardly to one knee and
extended the wounded leg out before him.
       "Next!" came the summons from the man on the floor, a priest of
singularly arrogant manner. The sleeves of his robe were tied up behind him, and
his whole body—legs, arms, shoulders, even his forehead—seemed to consist of
bulging muscles. The oak pole he held vertically was at least ten feet in length.
       A man who seemed to be one of those who'd arrived that day spoke up. He
fastened up his sleeves with a leather thong and strode into the practice area. The
priest stood motionless as the challenger went to the wall, chose a halberd, and
came to face him. They bowed, as was customary, but no sooner had they done
this than the priest let out a howl like that of a wild hound, simultaneously
bringing his pole down forcefully on the challenger's skull.
       "Next," he called, reverting to his original position.
       That was all: the challenger was finished. While he did not appear to be
dead yet, the simple act of lifting his head from the floor was more than he could

manage. A couple of the student-priests went out and dragged him back by the
sleeves and waist of his kimono. On the floor behind him stretched a thread of
saliva mixed with blood.
       "Next!" shouted the priest again, as surly as ever.
       At first Musashi thought he was the second-generation master Inshun, but
the men sitting around him said no, he was Agon, one of the senior disciples
who were known as the "Seven Pillars of the Hōzōin." Inshun himself, they said,
never had to engage in a bout, because challengers were always put down by one
of these.
      "Is there no one else?" bellowed Agon, now holding his practice lance
      horizontally.
      The brawny steward was comparing his registry with the faces of the
      waiting men. He pointed at one.
      "No, not today.... I'll come again some other time."
      "How about you?"
      "No. I don't feel quite up to it today."
      One by one they backed out, until Musashi saw the finger pointing at him.
      "How about you?"
      "If you please."
      " 'If you please'? What's that supposed to mean?"
      "It means I'd like to fight."
       All eyes focused on Musashi as he rose. The haughty Agon had retired
from the floor and was talking and laughing animatedly with a group of priests,
but when it appeared that another challenger had been found, a bored look came
over his face, and he said lazily, "Somebody take over for me."
       "Go ahead," they urged. "There's only one more."
       Giving in, Agon walked nonchalantly back to the center of the floor. He
took a fresh grip on the shiny black wooden pole, with which he seemed totally
familiar. In quick order, he assumed an attacking stance, turned his back on
Musashi, and charged off in the other direction.
       "Yah-h-h-h!" Screaming like an enraged roc, he hurtled toward the back
wall and thrust his lance viciously into a section used for practice purposes. The
boards had been recently replaced, but despite the resilience of the new wood,
Agon's bladeless lance plowed straight through.
       "Yow-w-w!" His grotesque scream of triumph reverberated through the
hall as he disengaged the lance and started to dance, rather than walk, back
toward Musashi, steam rising from his muscle-bound body. Taking a stance

some distance away, he glared at his latest challenger ferociously. Musashi had
come forward with only his wooden sword and now stood quite still, looking a
little surprised.
        "Ready!" cried Agon.
        A dry laugh was heard outside the window, and a voice said, "Agon, don't
be a fool! Look, you stupid oaf, look! That's not a board you're about to take on."
        Without relaxing his stance, Agon looked toward the window. "Who's
there?" he bellowed.
        The laughter continued, and then there came into view above the
windowsill, as though it had been hung there by an antique dealer, a shiny pate
and a pair of snow-white eyebrows.
        "It won't do you any good, Agon. Not this time. Let the man wait until the
day after tomorrow, when Inshun returns."
        Musashi, who had also turned his head toward the window, saw that the
face belonged to the old man he had seen on his way to the Hōzōin, but no
sooner had he realized this than the head disappeared.
        Agon heeded the old man's warning to the extent of relaxing his hold on
his weapon, but the minute his eyes met Musashi's again, he swore in the
direction of the now empty window—and ignored the advice he had received.
        As Agon tightened his grip on his lance, Musashi asked, for the sake of
form, "Are you ready now?"
        This solicitude drove Agon wild. His muscles were like steel, and when he
jumped, he did so with awesome lightness. His feet seemed to be on the floor
and in the air at the same time, quivering like moonlight on ocean waves.
        Musashi stood perfectly still, or so it seemed. There was nothing unusual
about his stance; he held his sword straight out with both hands, but being
slightly smaller than his opponent and not so conspicuously muscular, he looked
almost casual. The greatest difference was in the eyes. Musashi's were as sharp
as a bird's, their pupils a clear coral tinted with blood.
        Agon shook his head, perhaps to shake off the streams of sweat pouring
down from his forehead, perhaps to shake off the old man's warning words. Had
they lingered on? Was he attempting to cast them out of his mind? Whatever the
reason, he was extremely agitated. He repeatedly shifted his position, trying to
draw out Musashi, but Musashi remained motionless.
        Agon's lunge was accompanied by a piercing scream. In the split second
that decided the encounter, Musashi parried and counterattacked.
        "What happened?"

       Agon's fellow priests hastily ran forward and crowded around him in a
black circle. In the general confusion, some tripped over his practice lance and
went sprawling.
       A priest stood up, his hands and chest smeared with blood, shouting,
"Medicine! Bring the medicine. Quick!"
       "You won't need any medicine." It was the old man, who had come in the
front entrance and quickly assessed the situation. His face turned sour. "If I'd
thought medicine would save him, I wouldn't have tried to stop him in the first
place. The idiot!"
       No one paid any attention to Musashi. For lack of anything better to do, he
walked to the front door and began putting his sandals on.
      The old man followed him. "You!" he said.
      Over his shoulder, Musashi replied, "Yes?"
      "I'd like to have a few words with you. Come back inside."
      He led Musashi to a room behind the practice hall—a simple, square cell,
      the only opening in the four walls being the door.
       After they were seated, the old man said, "It would be more proper for the
abbot to come and greet you, but he's on a trip and won't be back for two or three
days. So I'll act on his behalf."
       "This is very kind of you," said Musashi, bowing his head. "I'm grateful
for the good training I received today, but I feel I should apologize for the
unfortunate way it turned out—"
      "Why? Things like that happen. You have to be ready to accept it before
      you start fighting. Don't let it worry you."
      "How are Agon's injuries?"
      "He was killed instantly," said the old man. The breath with which he spoke
      felt like a cold wind on Musashi's face.
       "He's dead?" To himself, he said: "So, it's happened again." Another life
cut short by his wooden sword. He closed his eyes and in his heart called on the
name of the Buddha, as he had on similar occasions in the past.
      "Young man!"
      "Yes, sir."
      "Is your name Miyamoto Musashi?"
      "That's correct."
      "Under whom did you study the martial arts?"
       "I've had no teacher in the ordinary sense. My father taught me how to use
the truncheon when I was young. Since then, I've picked up a number of points

from older samurai in various provinces. I've also spent some time traveling
about the countryside, learning from the mountains and the rivers. I regard them,
too, as teachers."
      "You seem to have the right attitude. But you're so strong! Much too
      strong!"
      Believing he was being praised, Musashi blushed and said, "Oh, no! I'm
      still immature. I'm always making blunders."
      "That's not what I mean. Your strength is your problem. You must learn to
      control it, become weaker."
      "What?" Musashi asked perplexedly.
      "You will recall that a short while ago you passed through the vegetable
      garden where I was at work."
      "Yes."
      "When you saw me, you jumped away, didn't you?"
      "Yes."
      "Why did you do that?"
       "Well, somehow I imagined that you might use your hoe as a weapon and
strike my legs with it. Then, too, though your attention seemed to be focused on
the ground, my whole body felt transfixed by your eyes. I felt something
murderous in that look, as though you were searching for my weak spot—so as
to attack it."
       The old man laughed. "It was the other way around. When you were still
fifty feet from me, I perceived what you call 'something murderous' in the air. I
sensed it in the tip of my hoe—that's how strongly your fighting spirit and
ambition manifest themselves in every step you take. I knew I had to be prepared
to defend myself.
       "If it had been one of the local farmers passing by, I myself would have
been no more than an old man tending vegetables. True, you sensed belligerence
in me, but it was only a reflection of your own."
       So Musashi had been right in thinking, even before they first exchanged
words, that here was no ordinary man. Now he keenly felt that the priest was the
master, and he the pupil. His attitude toward the old man with the bent back
became appropriately deferential.
      "I thank you for the lesson you have given me. May I ask your name and
      your position in this temple?"
      "Oh, I don't belong to the Hōzōin. I'm the abbot of the Ōzōin. My name is
      Nikkan."

      "I see."
       "I'm an old friend of In'ei, and since he was studying the use of the lance, I
decided to study along with him. Later, I had an afterthought or two. Now I
never touch the weapon."
       "I guess that means that Inshun, the present abbot here, is your disciple."
       "Yes, it could be put that way. But priests shouldn't have any use for
weapons, and I consider it unfortunate that the Hōzōin has become famous for a
martial art, rather than for its religious fervor. Still, there were people who felt
that it would be a pity to let the Hōzōin Style die out, so I taught it to Inshun.
And to no one else."
      "I wonder if you'd let me stay in your temple until Inshun returns." "Do you
      propose to challenge him?"
      "Well, as long as I'm here, I'd like to see how the foremost master uses his
      lance."
      Nikkan shook his head reproachfully. "It's a waste of time. There's nothing
      to be learned here."
      "Is that so?"
       "You've already seen the Hōzōin lancemanship, just now, when you fought
Agon. What more do you need to see? If you want to learn more, watch me.
Look into my eyes."
       Nikkan drew up his shoulders, put his head slightly forward, and stared at
Musashi. His eyes seemed about to jump from their sockets. As Musashi stared
back, Nikkan's pupils shone first with a coral flame, then gradually took on an
azure profundity. The glow burned and numbed Musashi's mind. He looked
away. Nikkan's crackling laugh was like the clatter of bone-dry boards.
       He relaxed his stare only when a younger priest came in and whispered to
him. "Bring it in," he commanded.
       Presently the young priest returned with a tray and a round wooden rice
container, from which Nikkan scooped rice into a bowl. He gave it to Musashi.
       "I recommend the tea gruel and pickles. It's the practice of the Hōzōin to
serve them to all those who come here to study, so don't feel they're going to any
special trouble for you. They make their own pickles—called Hōzōin pickles, in
fact—cucumbers stuffed with basil and red pepper. I think you'll find they taste
rather good."
       As Musashi picked up his chopsticks, he felt Nikkan's keen eyes on him
again. He could not tell at this point whether their piercing quality originated
within the priest or was a response to something he himself emitted. As he bit

into a pickle, the feeling swept over him that Takuan's fist was about to smite
him again, or perhaps the lance near the threshold was about to fly at him.
     After he had finished a bowl of rice mixed with tea and two pickles, Nikkan
     asked, "Would you care for another helping?"
     "No, thank you. I've had plenty."
     "What do you think of the pickles?"
     "Very good, thank you."


       Even after he'd left, the sting of the red pepper on Musashi's tongue was all
he could recall of the pickles' flavor. Nor was that the only sting he felt, for he
came away convinced that somehow he'd suffered a defeat. "I lost," he grumbled
to himself, walking slowly through a grove of cryptomerias. "I've been
outclassed!" In the dim light, fleeting shadows ran across his path, a small herd
of deer, frightened by his footsteps.
       "When it was only a matter of physical strength, I won, but I left there
feeling defeated. Why? Did I win outwardly only to lose inwardly?"
       Suddenly remembering Jōtarō, he retraced his steps to the Hōzōin, where
the lights were still burning. When he announced himself, the priest standing
watch at the door poked his head out and said casually, "What is it? Did you
forget something?"
       "Yes. Tomorrow, or the next day, I expect someone to come here looking
for me. When he does, will you tell him I'll be staying in the neighborhood of
Sarusawa Pond? He should ask for me at the inns there."
       "All right."
       Since the reply was so casual, Musashi felt constrained to add, "It'll be a
boy. His name is Jōtarō. He's very young, so please be sure you make the
message clear to him."
       Once again striding down the path he had taken earlier, Musashi muttered
to himself, "That proves I lost. I even forgot to leave a message for Jōtarō. I was
beaten by the old abbot!" Musashi's dejection persisted. Although he had won
against Agon, the only thing that stuck in his mind was the immaturity he had
felt in Nikkan's presence. How could he ever become a great swordsman, the
greatest of them all? This was the question that obsessed him night and day, and
today's encounter had left him utterly depressed.
       During the past twenty years or so, the area between Sarusawa Pond and
the lower reaches of the Sai River had been built up steadily, and there was a

jumble of new houses, inns and shops. Only recently, Okubo Nagayasu had
come to govern the city for the Tokugawas and had set up his administrative
offices nearby. In the middle of the town was the establishment of a Chinese who
was said to be a descendant of Lin Ho-ching; he had done so well with his
stuffed dumplings that an expansion of his shop in the direction of the pond was
under way.
       Musashi stopped amid the lights of the busiest district and wondered
where he should stay. There were plenty of inns, but he had to be careful about
his expenses; at the same time, he wanted to choose a place not too far off the
beaten track, so Jōtarō could find him easily.
       He had just eaten at the temple, but when he caught a whiff of the stuffed
dumplings, he felt hungry again. Entering the shop, he sat down and ordered a
whole plateful. When they arrived, Musashi noted that the name Lin was burned
into the bottom of the dumplings. Unlike the hot pickles at the Hōzōin, the
dumplings had a flavor he could savor with pleasure.
       The young girl who poured his tea asked politely, "Where are you planning
to stay tonight?"
       Musashi, unfamiliar with the district, welcomed the opportunity to explain
his situation and ask her advice. She told him one of the proprietor's relatives
had a private boardinghouse where he would be welcome, and without waiting
for his answer, trotted off. She returned with a youngish woman, whose shaved
eyebrows indicated she was married—presumably the proprietor's wife.
       The boardinghouse was on a quiet alley not far from the restaurant,
apparently an ordinary residence that sometimes took in guests. The eyebrowless
mistress of the shop, who had shown him the way, tapped lightly on the door,
then turned to Musashi and said quietly, "It's my elder sister's house, so don't
worry about tipping or anything."
       The maid came out of the house and the two of them exchanged whispers
for a moment or two. Apparently satisfied, she led Musashi to the second floor.
       The room and its furnishings were too good for an ordinary inn, making
Musashi feel a bit ill at ease. He wondered why a house as well-off as this one
would take in boarders and asked the maid about it, but she just smiled and said
nothing. Having already eaten, he had his bath and went to bed, but the question
was still on his mind when he went off to sleep.
       Next morning, he said to the maid, "Someone is supposed to come looking
for me. Will it be all right if I stay over for a day or two until he arrives?" "By all
means," she replied, without even asking the lady of the house, who soon came

herself to pay her respects.
       She was a good-looking woman of about thirty, with fine smooth skin.
When Musashi tried to satisfy his curiosity about why she was accepting
roomers, she laughingly replied, "To tell the truth, I'm a widow—my husband
was a Nō actor by the name of Kanze—and I'm afraid to be without a man in the
house, what with all these ill-bred rōnin in the vicinity." She went on to explain
that while the streets were full of drinking shops and prostitutes, many of the
indigent samurai were not satisfied with these diversions. They would pump
information from the local youths and attack houses where there were no men
about. They spoke of this as "calling on the widows."
       "In other words," said Musashi, "you take in people like me to act as your
bodyguard, right?"
       "Well," she said, smiling, "as I said, there are no men in the household.
Please feel free to stay as long as you like."
       "I understand perfectly. I hope you'll feel safe as long as I'm here. There's
only one request I'd like to make. I'm expecting a visitor, so I wonder if you'd
mind putting a marker with my name on it outside the gate."
       The widow, not at all unhappy to let it be known that she had a man in the
house, obligingly wrote "Miyamoto Musashi" on a strip of paper and pasted it on
the gatepost.
       Jōtarō did not show up that day, but on the next, Musashi received a visit
from a group of three samurai. Pushing their way past the protesting maid, they
came straight upstairs to his room. Musashi saw immediately that they were
among those who had been present at the Hōzōin when he had killed Agon.
Sitting down around him as though they'd known him all their lives, they started
pouring on the flattery.
       "I never saw anything like it in my life," said one. "I'm sure nothing of the
kind ever happened at the Hōzōin before. Just think! An unknown visitor arrives
and, just like that, downs one of the Seven Pillars. And not just anyone—the
terrifying Agon himself. One grunt and he was spitting blood. You don't often
see sights like that!"
       Another went on in the same vein. "Everyone we know is talking about it.
All the rōnin are asking each other just who this Miyamoto Musashi is. That was
a bad day for the Hōzōin's reputation."
      "Why, you must be the greatest swordsman in the country!"
      "And so young, too!"
      "No doubt about it. And you'll get even better with time."

       "If you don't mind my asking, how does it happen that with your ability
you're only a rōnin? It's a waste of your talents not to be in the service of a
daimyō!"
       They paused only long enough to slurp some tea and devour the tea cakes
with gusto, spilling crumbs all over their laps and on the floor.
       Musashi, embarrassed by the extravagance of their praise, shifted his eyes
from right to left and back again. For a time, he listened with an impassive face,
thinking that sooner or later their momentum would run down. When they
showed no signs of changing the subject, he took the initiative by asking their
names.
       "Oh, I'm sorry. I'm Yamazoe Dampachi. I used to be in the service of Lord
Gamō," said the first.
       The man next to him said, "I'm Otomo Banryū. I've mastered the Bokuden
Style, and I have a lot of plans for the future."
       "I'm Yasukawa Yasubei," said the third with a chuckle, "and I've never
been anything but a rōnin, like my father before me."
       Musashi wondered why they were taking up their time and his with their
small talk. It became apparent that he would not find out unless he asked, so the
next time there was a break in the conversation, he said, "Presumably you came
because you had some business with me."
       They feigned surprise at the very idea but soon admitted they had come on
what they regarded as a very important mission. Moving quickly forward,
Yasubei said, "As a matter of fact, we do have some business with you. You see,
we're planning to put on a public 'entertainment' at the foot of Mount Kasuga,
and we wanted to talk to you about it. Not a play or anything like that. What we
have in mind is a series of matches that would teach the people about the martial
arts, and at the same time give them something to lay bets on.
       He went on to say that the stands were already being put up, and that the
prospects looked excellent. They felt, however, that they needed another man,
because with just the three of them, some really strong samurai might show up
and beat them all, which would mean that their hard-earned money would go
down the drain. They had decided that Musashi was just the right person for
them. If he would join in with them, they would not only split the profits but pay
for his food and lodging while the matches were in progress. That way he could
easily earn some fast money for his future travels.
       Musashi listened with some amusement to their blandishments, but by and
by he grew tired and broke in. "If that's all you want, there's no point in

discussing it. I'm not interested."
       "But why?" asked Dampachi. "Why aren't you interested?"
       Musashi's youthful temper erupted. "I'm not a gambler!" he stated
indignantly. "And I eat with chopsticks, not with my sword!"
       "What's that?" protested the three, insulted by his implication. "What do
you mean by that?"
       "Don't you understand, you fools? I am a samurai, and I intend to remain a
samurai. Even if I starve in the process. Now clear out of here!"
       One man's mouth twisted into a nasty snarl, and another, red with anger,
shouted, "You'll regret this!"
       They well knew that the three of them together were no match for
Musashi, but to save face, they stamped out noisily, scowling and doing their
best to give the impression they weren't through with him yet.
       That night, as on other recent nights, there was a milky, slightly overcast
moon. The young mistress of the house, free from worry as long as Musashi was
in residence, was careful to provide him with delicious food and sake of good
quality. He ate downstairs with the family and in the process drank himself into a
mellow mood.
       Returning to his room, he sprawled on the floor. His thoughts soon came to
rest on Nikkan.
       "It's humiliating," he said to himself.
       The adversaries he had defeated, even the ones he had killed or half killed,
always disappeared from his mind like so much froth, but he couldn't forget
anyone who got the better of him in any way or, for that matter, anyone in whom
he sensed an overpowering presence. Men like that dwelt in his mind like living
spirits, and he thought constantly of how one day he might be able to
overshadow them.
       "Humiliating!" he repeated.
       He clutched at his hair and pondered how he could get the better of
Nikkan, how he could face that unearthly stare without flinching. For two days
this question had gnawed at him. It wasn't that he wished Nikkan any harm, but
he was sorely disappointed with himself.
       "Is it that I'm no good?" he asked himself ruefully. Having learned
swordsmanship on his own, and thus lacking an objective appraisal of his own
strength, he couldn't help but doubt his own ability to ever achieve power such
as the old priest exuded.
       Nikkan had told him he was too strong, that he had to learn to become

weaker. This was the point that sent his mind off on tangent after tangent, for he
couldn't fathom the meaning. Wasn't strength a warrior's most important quality?
Was that not what made one warrior superior to others? How could Nikkan
speak of it as a flaw?
       "Maybe," thought Musashi, "the old rascal was toying with me. Maybe he
considered my youth and decided to talk in riddles just to confuse me and amuse
himself. Then after I left, he had a good laugh. It's possible."
       At times like this, Musashi wondered whether it had been wise to read all
those books at Himeji Castle. Until then, he had never bothered much about
figuring things out, but now, whenever something happened, he couldn't rest
until he'd found an explanation satisfying to his intellect. Previously he'd acted
on instinct; now he had to understand each small thing before he could accept it.
And this applied not only to swordsmanship but to the way he viewed humanity
and society.
       It was true that the daredevil in him had been tamed. Yet Nikkan said he
was "too strong." Musashi assumed that Nikkan was referring not to physical
strength but to the savage fighting spirit with which he had been born. Could the
priest really have perceived it, or was he guessing?
       "The knowledge that comes from books is of no use to the warrior," he
reassured himself. "If a man worries too much about what others think or do,
he's apt to be slow to act. Why, if Nikkan himself closed his eyes for a moment
and made one misstep, he'd crumble and fall to pieces!"
       The sound of footsteps on the stairs intruded upon his musings. The maid
appeared, and after her Jōtarō, his dark skin further blackened by the grime
acquired on his journey, but his spritelike hair white with dust. Musashi, truly
happy to have the diversion of his little friend, welcomed him with open arms.
      The boy plopped down on the floor and stretched his dirty legs out straight.
      "Am I tired!" he sighed.
      "Did you have trouble finding me?"
      "Trouble! I almost gave up. I've been searching all over!"
      "Didn't you ask at the Hōzōin?"
      "Yes, but they said they didn't know anything about you."
       "Oh, they did, did they?" Musashi's eyes narrowed. "And after I said
specifically that you'd find me near Sarusawa Pond. Oh, well, I'm glad you made
it."
       "Here's the answer from the Yoshioka School." He handed Musashi the
bamboo tube. "I couldn't find Hon'iden Matahachi, so I asked the people at his

house to give him the message."
       "Fine. Now run along and have a bath. They'll give you some dinner
downstairs."
       Musashi took the letter from its container and read it. It said that Seijūrō
looked forward to a "second bout"; if Musashi didn't show up as promised the
following year, it would be assumed that he'd lost his nerve. Should that happen,
Seijūrō would make sure that Musashi became the laughingstock of Kyoto. This
braggadocio was set down in clumsy handwriting, presumably by someone other
than Seijūrō.
       As Musashi tore the letter to bits and burned it, the charred pieces fluttered
up into the air like so many black butterflies.
       Seijūrō had spoken of a "bout," but it was clear that it was going to be
more than that. It would be a battle to the death. Next year, as a result of this
insulting note, which one of the combatants would end up in ashes?
       Musashi took it for granted that a warrior must be content to live from day
to day, never knowing each morning if he'd live to see nightfall. Nevertheless,
the thought that he might really die in the coming year worried him somewhat.
There were so many things he still wanted to do. For one thing, there was his
burning desire to become a great swordsman. But that wasn't all. So far, he
reflected, he hadn't done any of the things people ordinarily do in the course of a
lifetime.
       At this stage of his life, he was still vain enough to think he'd like to have
retainers—a lot of them—leading his horses and carrying his falcons, just like
Bokuden and Lord Kōizumi of Ise. He would like, too, to have a proper house,
with a good wife and loyal servants. He wanted to be a good master and to enjoy
the warmth and comfort of home life. And of course, before he settled down, he
had a secret longing to have a passionate love affair. During all these years of
thinking solely about the Way of the Samurai he had, not unnaturally, remained
chaste. Still, he was struck by some of the women he saw on the streets of Kyoto
and Nara, and it was not their aesthetic qualities alone that pleased him; they
aroused him physically.
       His thoughts turned to Otsū. Though she was now a creature of the distant
past, he felt closely bound to her. How many times, when he was lonely or
melancholy, had the vague recollection of her alone cheered him up.
       Presently he came out of his reverie. Jōtarō had rejoined him, bathed,
satiated and proud to have carried out his mission successfully. Sitting with his
short legs crossed and his hands between his knees, he didn't take long to

succumb to fatigue. He was soon snoozing blissfully, his mouth open. Musashi
put him to bed.
       When morning came, the boy was up with the sparrows. Musashi also
arose early, since he intended to resume his travels.
       As he was dressing, the widow appeared and said in a regretful tone, "You
seem in a hurry to leave." In her arms she was carrying some clothing, which she
offered him. "I've sewn these things together for you as a parting gift—a kimono
with a short cloak. I'm not sure you'll like them, but I hope you'll wear them."
       Musashi looked at her in astonishment. The garments were much too
expensive for him to accept after having stayed there only two days. He tried to
refuse, but the widow insisted. "No, you must take them. They aren't anything
very special anyway. I have a lot of old kimono and Nō costumes left by my
husband. I have no use for them. I thought it would be nice for you to have
some. I do hope you won't refuse. Now that I've altered them to fit you, if you
don't take them, they'll just go to waste."
       She went behind Musashi and held up the kimono for him to slip his arms
into. As he put it on, he realized that the silk was of very good quality and felt
more embarrassed than ever. The sleeveless cloak was particularly fine; it must
have been imported from China. The hem was gold brocade, the lining silk
crepe, and the leather fastening straps had been dyed purple.
      "It looks perfect on you!" exclaimed the widow.
      Jōtarō, looking on enviously, suddenly said to her, "What're you going to
      give me?"
      The widow laughed. "You should be happy for the chance to accompany
      your fine master."
      "Aw," grumbled Jōtarō, "who wants an old kimono anyway?"
      "Is there anything you do want?"
       Running to the wall in the anteroom and taking a Nō mask down from its
hook, the boy said, "Yes, this!" He'd coveted it since first spying it the night
before, and now he rubbed it tenderly against his cheek.
       Musashi was surprised at the boy's good taste. He himself had found it
admirably executed. There was no way of knowing who had made it, but it was
certainly two or three centuries old and had evidently been used in actual Nō
performances. The face, carved with exquisite care, was that of a female demon,
but whereas the usual mask of this type was grotesquely painted with blue spots,
this was the face of a beautiful and elegant young girl. It was peculiar only in
that one side of her mouth curved sharply upward in the eeriest fashion

imaginable. Obviously not a fictitious face conjured up by the artist, it was the
portrait of a real, living madwoman, beautiful yet bewitched. "That you cannot
have," said the widow firmly, trying to take the mask away from the boy.
        Evading her reach, Jōtarō put the mask on the top of his head and danced
about the room, shouting defiantly, "What do you need it for? It's mine now; I'm
going to keep it!"
        Musashi, surprised and embarrassed by his ward's conduct, made an
attempt to catch him, but Jōtarō stuffed the mask into his kimono and fled down
the stairs, the widow giving chase. Although she was laughing, not angry at all,
she clearly didn't intend to part with the mask.
        Presently Jōtarō climbed slowly back up the stairs. Musashi, ready to scold
him severely, was seated with his face toward the door. But as the boy entered,
he cried, "Boo!" and held the mask out before him. Musashi was startled; his
muscles tensed and his knees shifted inadvertently.
        He wondered why Jōtarō's prank had such an effect on him, but as he
stared at the mask in the dim light, he began to understand. The carver had put
something diabolical into his creation. That crescent smile, curving up on the left
side of the white face, was haunted, possessed of a devil.
       "If we're going, let's go," said Jōtarō.
       Musashi, without rising, said, "Why haven't you given the mask back yet?
       What do you want with a thing like that?"
       "But she said I could keep it! She gave it to me."
       "She did not! Go downstairs and give it back to her."
        "But she gave it to me! When I offered to return it, she said that if I wanted
it so badly, I could keep it. She just wanted to make sure I'd take good care of it,
so I promised her I would."
        "What am I going to do with you!" Musashi felt ashamed about accepting,
first, the beautiful kimono and then this mask that the widow seemed to treasure.
He would have liked to do something in return, but she was obviously not in
need of money—certainly not the small amount he could have spared—and none
of his meager possessions would make a suitable gift. He descended the stairs,
apologizing for Jōtarō's rudeness and attempting to return the mask.
        The widow, however, said, "No, the more I think of it, the more I think I'd
be happier without it. And he does want it so badly.... Don't be too hard on him.
        Suspecting the mask had some special significance for her, Musashi tried
once more to return it, but by this time Jōtarō had his straw sandals on and was
outside waiting by the gate, a smug look on his face. Musashi, eager to be off,

gave in to her kindness and accepted the gift. The young widow said she was
sorrier to see Musashi go than she was to lose the mask, and begged him several
times to come back and stay there whenever he was in Nara.
       Musashi was tying the thongs of his sandals when the dumpling-maker's
wife came running up. "Oh," she said breathlessly, "I'm so glad you haven't left
yet. You can't go now! Please, go back upstairs. Something terrible is going on!"
The woman's voice trembled as though she thought some fearful ogre was about
to attack her.
       Musashi finished tying his sandals and calmly raised his head. "What is it?
What's so terrible?"
       "The priests at the Hōzōin have heard you're leaving today, and more than
ten of them have taken their lances and are lying in wait for you in Hannya
Plain."
       "Oh?"
       "Yes, and the abbot, Inshun, is with them. My husband knows one of the
priests, and he asked him what was going on. The priest said the man who's been
staying here for the last couple of days, the man named Miyamoto, was leaving
Nara today, and the priests were going to waylay him on the road."
       Her face twitching with fright, she assured Musashi that it would be
suicide to leave Nara this morning and fervently urged him to lie low for another
night. It would be safer, in her opinion, to try and sneak away the next day.
       "I see," said Musashi without emotion. "You say they plan to meet me on
Hannya Plain?"
       "I'm not sure exactly where, but they went off in that direction. Some of
the townspeople told me it wasn't only the priests. They said a whole lot of the
rōnin, too, had got together, saying they'd catch you and turn you over to the
Hōzōin. Did you say something bad about the temple, or insult them in some
way?"
       "No."
       "Well, they say the priests are furious because you hired somebody to put
up posters with verses on them making fun of the Hōzōin. They took this to
mean you were gloating over having killed one of their men."
       "I didn't do anything of the sort. There's been a mistake."
       "Well, if it's a mistake, you shouldn't go out and get yourself killed over
it!"
       His brow beaded with sweat, Musashi looked thoughtfully up at the sky,
recalling how angry the three rōnin had been when he turned down their

business deal. Maybe he was indebted to them for all this. It would be just like
them to put up offensive posters and then spread the word that he'd done it.
      Abruptly he stood up. "I'm leaving," he said.
      He strapped his traveling bag to his back, took his basket hat in hand, and
turning to the two women, thanked them for their kindness. As he started toward
the gate, the widow, now in tears, followed along, begging him not to go.
      "If I stay over another night," he pointed out, "there's bound to be trouble
at your house. I certainly wouldn't want that to happen, after you've been so
good to us."
      "I don't care," she insisted. "You'd be safer here."
      "No, I'll go now. Jō! Say thank you to the lady."
      Dutifully, the boy bowed and did as he was told. He, too, appeared to be in
low spirits, but not because he was sorry to leave. When it came right down to it,
Jōtarō did not really know Musashi. In Kyoto, he had heard that his master was a
weakling and a coward, and the thought that the notorious lancers of the Hōzōin
were set to attack him was very depressing. His youthful heart was filled with
gloom and foreboding.
