The Water Sprite


      In a hamlet northwest of Kyoto, the heavy thuds of a mallet pounding rice
straw shook the ground. Unseasonal torrents of rain soaked into the brooding
thatched roofs. This was a sort of no-man's-land, between the city and the
farming district, and the poverty was so extreme that at twilight the smoke of
kitchen fires billowed from only a handful of houses.
      A basket hat suspended under the eaves of one small house proclaimed in
bold, rough characters that this was an inn, albeit one of the cheapest variety.
The travelers who stopped here were impecunious and rented only floor space.
For pallets they paid extra, but few could afford such luxury.
      In the dirt-floored kitchen beside the entranceway, a boy leaned with his
hands on the raised tatami of the adjoining room, in the center of which was a
sunken hearth.
      "Hello! . . . Good evening! . . . Anybody here?" It was the errand boy from
the drinking shop, another shabby affair just down the road.
      The boy's voice was too loud for his size. He could not have been more
than ten or eleven years old, and with his hair wet from the rain and hanging
down over his ears, he looked no more substantial than a water sprite in a
whimsical painting. He was dressed for the part too: thigh-length kimono with
tubular sleeves, a thick cord for an obi, and mud splattered clear up his back
from running in his wooden clogs.
     "That you, Jō?" called the old innkeeper from a back room.
     "Yes. Would you like me to bring you some sake?"
     "No, not today. The lodger isn't back yet. I don't need any."
     "Well, he'll want some when he does come back, won't he? I'll bring the
     usual amount."
     "If he does, I'll come get it myself."
     Reluctant to leave without an order, the boy asked, "What are you doing in
     there?"
      "I'm writing a letter, going to send it by the packhorse up to Kurama
tomorrow. But it's a bit difficult. And my back's getting sore. Be quiet, don't
bother me."
      "That's pretty funny, isn't it? You're so old you're beginning to stoop, and

you still don't know how to write properly!"
     "That's enough out of you. If I hear any more sass, I'll take a stick of
     firewood to you."
     "Want me to write it for you?"
     "Ha, as if you could."
      "Oh, I can," the boy asserted as he came into the room. He looked over the
old man's shoulder at the letter and burst into laughter. "Are you trying to write
'potatoes'? The character you've written means 'pole.'"
      "Quiet!"
      "I won't say a word, if you insist. But your writing's terrible. Are you
planning to send your friends some potatoes, or some poles?"
      "Potatoes."
      The boy read a moment longer, then announced, "It's no good. Nobody but
you could guess what this letter's supposed to mean!"
     "Well, if you're so smart, see what you can do with it, then."
     "All right. Just tell me what you want to say." Jōtarō sat down and took up
     the brush.
     "You clumsy ass!" the old man exclaimed.
     "Why call me clumsy? You're the one who can't write!"
     "Your nose is dripping on the paper."
      "Oh, sorry. You can give me this piece for my pay." He proceeded to blow
his nose on the soiled sheet. "Now, what is it you want to say?" Holding the
brush firmly, he wrote with ease as the old man dictated.
      Just as the letter was finished, the lodger returned, casually throwing aside
a charcoal sack he had picked up somewhere to put over his head.
      Musashi, stopping by the door, wrung the water out of his sleeves and
grumbled, "I guess this'll be the end of the plum blossoms." In the twenty-odd
days Musashi had been there, the inn had come to seem like home. He was
gazing out at the tree by the front gate, where pink blossoms had greeted his eye
every morning since his arrival. The fallen petals lay scattered about in the mud.
      Entering the kitchen, he was surprised to catch a glimpse of the boy from
the sake shop, head to head with the innkeeper. Curious as to what they were
doing, he stole up behind the old man and peered over his shoulder.
      Jōtarō looked up into Musashi's face, then hastily hid the brush and paper
behind him. "You shouldn't sneak up on people like that," he complained.
     "Let me see," said Musashi teasingly.
     "No," said Jōtarō with a defiant shake of his head.

      "Come on, show me," said Musashi.
      "Only if you buy some sake."
      "Oh, so that's your game, is it? All right, I'll buy some."
      "Five gills?"
      "I don't need that much."
      "Three gills?"
      "Still too much."
      "Well, how much? Don't be such a tightwad!"
      "Tightwad? Now, you know I'm only a poor swordsman. Do you think I
      have money to throw away?
       "All right. I'll measure it out myself, give you your money's worth. But if I
do, you have to promise to tell me some stories."
       The bargaining concluded, Jōtarō splashed cheerfully off into the rain.
Musashi picked up the letter and read it. After a moment or two, he turned to the
innkeeper and asked, "Did he really write this?"
       "Yes. Amazing, isn't it? He seems very bright."
       While Musashi went to the well, poured some cold water over himself and
put on dry clothes, the old man hung a pot over the fire and set out some pickled
vegetables and a rice bowl. Musashi came back and sat down by the hearth.
      "What's that rascal up to?" muttered the innkeeper. "He's taking a long time
      with the sake."
      "How old is he?"
      "Eleven, I think he said."
      "Mature for his age, don't you think?"
       "Mm. I suppose it's because he's been working at the sake shop since he
was seven. He runs up against all kinds there—wagon drivers, the paper-maker
down the way, travelers, and what have you."
       "I wonder how he learned to write so well."
       "Is he really that good?"
       "Well, his writing has a certain childish quality, but there's an appealing—
what can I say?—directness about it. If I had a swordsman in mind, I would say
it shows spiritual breadth. The boy may eventually be somebody."
       "What do you mean?"
       "I mean become a real human being."
       "Oh?" The old man frowned, took the lid off the pot and resumed his
grumbling. "Still not back. I'll bet he's dawdling somewhere."
       He was about to put on his sandals and go for the sake himself when Jōtarō

returned. "What have you been up to?" he asked the boy. "You've been keeping
my guest waiting."
       "I couldn't help it. There was a customer in the shop, very drunk, and he
grabbed hold of me and started asking a lot of questions."
      "What kind of questions?"
      "He was asking about Miyamoto Musashi."
      "And I suppose you did a lot of blabbering."
       "It wouldn't matter if I did. Everybody around here knows what happened
at Kiyomizudera the other day. The woman next door, the daughter of the
lacquer man—both of them were at the temple that day. They saw what
happened."
       "Stop talking about that, won't you?" Musashi said, almost in a pleading
tone.
       The sharp-eyed boy sized up Musashi's mood and asked, "Can I stay here
for a while and talk with you?" He started washing off his feet, preparing to
come into the hearth room.
      "It's all right with me, if your master won't mind."
      "Oh, he doesn't need me right now."
      "All right."
       "I'll warm up your sake for you. I'm good at that." He settled a sake jar into
the warm ashes around the fire and soon announced it was ready.
      "Fast, aren't you?" said Musashi appreciatively.
      "Do you like sake?"
      "Yes."
      "But being so poor, I guess you don't drink very much, do you?" "That's
      right."
       "I thought men who were good at the martial arts served under great lords
and got big allowances. A customer at the shop told me once that Tsukahara
Bokuden always used to go around with seventy or eighty retainers, a change of
horses and a falcon."
       "That's true."
       "And I heard that a famous warrior named Yagyū, who serves the House of
Tokugawa, has an income of fifty thousand bushels of rice."
      "That's true too."
      "Then why are you so poor?"
      "I'm still studying."
      "How old will you have to be before you have lots of followers?" "I don't

      know if I ever will."
      "What's the matter? Aren't you any good?"
      "You heard what the people who saw me at the temple said. Any way you
      look at it, I ran away."
       "That's what everybody's saying: that shugyōsha at the inn—that's you—is
a weakling. But it makes me mad to listen to them." Jōtarō's lips tightened in a
straight line.
       "Ha, ha! Why should you mind? They're not talking about you."
       "Well, I feel sorry for you. Look, the paper-maker's son and the cooper's
son and some of the rest of the young men all get together sometimes behind the
lacquer shop for sword practice. Why don't you fight one of them and beat him?"
       "All right. If that's what you want, I will."
       Musashi was finding it difficult to refuse anything the boy asked, partly
because he himself was in many ways still a boy at heart and was able to
sympathize with Jōtarō. He was always looking, mostly unconsciously, for
something to take the place of the family affection lacking from his own
boyhood.
      "Let's talk about something else," he said. "I'll ask you a question for a
      change. Where were you born?"
      "In Himeji."
      "Oh, so you're from Harima."
      "Yes, and you're from Mimasaka, aren't you? Somebody said you were."
      "That's right. What does your father do?"
      "He used to be a samurai. A real honest-to-goodness samurai!"
       At first Musashi looked astonished, but actually the answer explained
several things, not the least of which was how the boy had learned to write so
well. He asked the father's name.
       "His name is Aoki Tanzaemon. He used to have an allowance of twenty-
five hundred bushels of rice, but when I was seven he left his lord's service and
came to Kyoto as a rōnin. After all his money was gone, he left me at the sake
shop and went to a temple to become a monk. But I don't want to stay at the
shop. I want to become a samurai like my father was, and I want to learn
swordsmanship like you. Isn't that the best way to become a samurai?"
       The boy paused, then continued earnestly: "I want to become your
follower—go around the country studying with you. Won't you take me on as
your pupil?"
       Having blurted out his purpose, Jōtarō put on a stubborn face reflecting

clearly his determination not to take no for an answer. He could not know, of
course, that he was pleading with a man who had caused his father no end of
trouble. Musashi, for his part, could not bring himself to refuse out of hand. Yet
what he was really thinking of was not whether to say yes or no but of Aoki
Tanzaemon and his unfortunate fate. He could not help sympathizing with the
man. The Way of the Samurai was a constant gamble, and a samurai had to be
ready at all times to kill or be killed. Mulling over this example of life's
vicissitudes, Musashi was saddened, and the effect of the sake wore off quite
suddenly. He felt lonely.
      Jōtarō was insistent. When the innkeeper tried to get him to leave Musashi
alone, he replied insolently and redoubled his efforts. He caught hold of
Musashi's wrist, then hugged his arm, finally broke into tears.
      Musashi, seeing no way out, said, "All right, all right, that's enough. You
can be my follower, but only after you go and talk it over with your master."
Jōtarō, satisfied at last, trotted off to the sake shop.


      The next morning, Musashi rose early, dressed, and called to the
innkeeper, "Would you please fix me a lunch box? It's been nice staying here
these few weeks, but I think I'll go on to Nara now."
      "Leaving so soon?" asked the innkeeper, not expecting the sudden
departure. "It's because that boy was pestering you, isn't it?"
      "Oh, no, it's not his fault. I've been thinking about going to Nara for some
time—to see the famous lance fighters at the Hōzōin. I hope he doesn't give you
too much trouble when he finds out I'm gone."
      "Don't worry about it. He's only a child. He'll scream and yell for a while,
then forget all about it."
      "I can't imagine that the sake man would let him leave anyway," said
Musashi as he stepped out onto the road.
      The storm had passed, as if wiped away, and the breeze brushed gently
against Musashi's skin, quite unlike the fierce wind of the day before.
      The Kamo River was up, the water muddy. At one end of the wooden
bridge at Sanjō Avenue, samurai were examining all the people who came and
went. Asking the reason for the inspection, Musashi was told it was because of
the new shōgun's impending visit. A vanguard of influential and minor feudal
lords had already arrived, and steps were being taken to keep dangerous
unattached samurai out of the city. Musashi, himself a rōnin, gave ready answers

to the questions asked and was allowed to pass.
       The experience set him to thinking about his own status as a wandering
masterless warrior pledged neither to the Tokugawas nor to their rivals in Osaka.
Running off to Sekigahara and taking sides with the Osaka forces against the
Tokugawas was a matter of inheritance. That had been his father's allegiance,
unchanged from the days when he served under Lord Shimmen of Iga. Toyotomi
Hideyoshi had died two years before the battle; his supporters, loyal to his son,
made up the Osaka faction. In Miyamoto, Hideyoshi was considered the greatest
of heroes, and Musashi remembered how as a child he had sat at the hearth and
listened to tales of the great warrior's prowess. These ideas formed in his youth
lingered with him, and even now, if pressed to say which side he favored, he'd
probably have said Osaka.
       Musashi had since learned a few things and now recognized that his
actions at the age of seventeen had been both mindless and devoid of
accomplishment. For a man to serve his lord faithfully, it was not enough to
jump blindly into the fray and brandish a lance. He must go all the way, to the
brink of death.
       "If a samurai dies with a prayer for his lord's victory on his lips, he has
done something fine and meaningful," was the way Musashi would have put it
now. But at the time neither he nor Matahachi had had any sense of loyalty.
What they had been thirsting for was fame and glory, and more to the point, a
means of gaining a livelihood without giving up anything of their own.
       It was odd that they should have thought of it that way. Having since
learned from Takuan that life is a jewel to be treasured, Musashi knew that far
from giving up nothing, he and Matahachi had unwittingly been offering their
most precious possession. Each had literally wagered everything he had on the
hope of receiving a paltry stipend as a samurai. In retrospect, he wondered how
they could have been so foolish.
       He noticed that he was approaching Daigo, south of the city, and since he'd
worked up quite a sweat, decided to stop for a rest.
       From a distance, he heard a voice shouting, "Wait! Wait!" Gazing far down
the steep mountain road, he made out the form of the little water sprite Jōtarō,
running for all he was worth. Presently the boy's angry eyes were glaring into
his.
       "You lied to me!" Jōtarō shouted. "Why did you do that!" Breathless from
running, face flushed, he spoke with belligerence, though it was clear he was on
the verge of tears.

       Musashi had to laugh at his getup. He had discarded the work clothes of
the day before in favor of an ordinary kimono, but it was only half big enough
for him, the skirt barely reaching his knees and the arms stopping at the elbows.
At his side hung a wooden sword that was longer than the boy was tall, on his
back a basket hat that looked as big as an umbrella.
       Even as he shouted at Musashi for having left him behind, he burst into
tears. Musashi hugged and tried to comfort him, but the boy wailed on,
apparently feeling that in the mountains, with no one around, he could let
himself go.
       Finally Musashi said, "Does it make you feel good, acting like a crybaby?"
       "I don't care!" Jōtarō sobbed. "You're a grownup, and yet you lied to me.
You said you'd let me be your follower—then went off and left me. Are
grownups supposed to act like that?"
       "I'm sorry," said Musashi.
       This simple apology turned the boy's crying into a pleading whine.
       "Stop it now," said Musashi. "I didn't mean to lie to you, but you have a
father and you have a master. I couldn't bring you with me unless your master
consented. I told you to go and talk with him, didn't I? It didn't seem likely to me
that he'd agree."
      "Why didn't you at least wait until you heard the answer?"
      "That's why I'm apologizing to you now. Did you really discuss this with
      him?"
      "Yes." He got his sniffling under control and pulled two leaves from a tree,
      on which he blew his nose.
      "And what did he say?"
      "He told me to go ahead."
      "Did he now?"
       "He said no self-respecting warrior or training school would take on a boy
like me, but since the samurai at the inn was a weakling, he ought to be just the
right person. He said maybe you could use me to carry your luggage, and he
gave me this wooden sword as a going-away present."
       Musashi smiled at the man's line of reasoning.
       "After that," continued the boy, "I went to the inn. The old man wasn't
       there, so I just borrowed this hat from off the hook under the eaves." "But
that's the inn's signboard; it has 'Lodgings' written on it." "Oh, I don't mind. I
need a hat in case it rains."
       It was clear from Jōtarō's attitude that as far as he was concerned, all

necessary promises and vows had been exchanged, and he was now Musashi's
disciple. Sensing this, Musashi resigned himself to being more or less stuck with
the child, but it also occurred to him that maybe it was all for the best. Indeed,
when he considered his own part in Tanzaemon's loss of status, he concluded
that perhaps he should be grateful for the opportunity to see to the boy's future. It
seemed the right thing to do.
       Jōtarō, now calm and reassured, suddenly remembered something and
reached inside his kimono. "I almost forgot. I have something for you. Here it
is." He pulled out a letter.
      Eyeing it curiously, Musashi asked, "Where did you get that?"
      "Remember last night I said there was a rōnin drinking at the shop, asking a
      lot of questions?"
      "Yes."
       "Well, when I went home, he was still there. He kept on asking about you.
He's some drinker, too—drank a whole bottle of sake by himself! Then he wrote
this letter and asked me to give it to you."
       Musashi cocked his head to one side in puzzlement and broke the seal.
Looking first at the bottom, he saw it was from Matahachi, who must have been
drunk indeed. Even the characters looked tipsy. As Musashi read the scroll, he
was seized with mixed feelings of nostalgia and sadness. Not only was the
writing chaotic; the message itself was rambling and imprecise.


     Since I left you at Mount Ibuki, I haven't forgotten the village. And I
haven't forgotten my old friend. By accident I heard your name at the Yoshioka
School. At the time, I got confused and couldn't decide whether to try to see you.
Now I'm in a sake shop. I've had a lot to drink.


     Thus far the meaning was clear enough, but from this point on the letter
was difficult to follow.


      Ever since I parted from you, I've been kept in a cage of lust, and idleness
has eaten into my bones. For five years I've spent my days in a stupor, doing
nothing. In the capital, you are now famous as a swordsman. I drink to you!
Some people say Musashi is a coward, good only at running away. Some say

you're an incomparable swordsman. I don't care which is true, I'm just happy
that your sword has the people in the capital talking.
      You're smart. You should be able to make your way with the sword. But as I
look back, I wonder about me, the way I am now. I'm a fool! How can a stupid
wretch like me face a wise friend like you without dying of shame?
      But wait! Life is long, and it's too early to say what the future will bring. I
don't want to see you now, but there will come a day when I will.
      I pray for your health.


       Then came a rapidly scrawled postscript informing him, at some length,
that the Yoshioka School took a serious view of the recent incident, that they
were looking everywhere for him, and that he should be careful about his
movements. It ended: "You mustn't die now that you're just beginning to make a
name for yourself. When I, too, have made something of myself, I want to see
you and talk over old times. Take care of yourself, stay alive, so you can be an
inspiration to me."
       Matahachi had no doubt meant well, but there was something twisted
about his attitude. Why must he praise Musashi so and in the next breath carry
on so about his own failings? "Why," wondered Musashi, "couldn't he just write
and say that it's been a long time, and why don't we get together and have a long
talk?"
      "Jo, did you ask this man for his address?"
      "No."
      "Did the people at the shop know him?"
      "I don't think so."
      "Did he come there often?"
      "No, this was the first time."
       Musashi was thinking that if he knew where Matahachi lived, he would go
back to Kyoto right now to see him. He wanted to talk to his childhood comrade,
try to bring him to his senses, reawaken in him the spirit he had once had. Since
he still considered Matahachi to be his friend, he would have liked to pull him
out of his present mood, with its apparently self-destructive tendencies. And of
course, he would also have liked to have Matahachi explain to his mother what a
mistake she was making.
      The two walked on silently. They were on their way down the mountain at
      Daigo, and the Rokujizō crossing was visible below them.

    Abruptly Musashi turned to the boy and said, "Jō, there's something I want
    you to do for me."
    "What is it?"
    "I want you to go on an errand."
    "Where to?"
    "Kyoto."
      "That means turning around and going back where I just came from."
"That's right. I want you to take a letter from me to the Yoshioka School on Shijō
Avenue."
    Jōtarō, crestfallen, kicked a rock with his toe.
    "Don't you want to go?" asked Musashi, looking him in the face.
    Jōtarō shook his head uncertainly. "I don't mind going, but aren't you just
    doing this to get rid of me?"
    His suspicion made Musashi feel guilty, for wasn't he the one who had
    broken the child's faith in adults?
      "No!" he said vigorously. "A samurai does not lie. Forgive me for what
happened this morning. It was just a mistake."
    "All right, I'll go."
    Entering a teahouse at the crossroads known as Rokuamida, they ordered
    tea and ate lunch.
    Musashi then wrote a letter, which he addressed to Yoshioka Seijūrō:


       I am told that you and your disciples are searching for me. As it happens, I
am now on the Yamato highroad, my intention being to travel around in the
general area of Iga and Ise for about a year to continue my study of
swordsmanship. I do not wish to change my plans at this time, but since I regret
as much as you do that I was unable to meet you during my previous visit to your
school, I should like to inform you that I shall certainly be back in the capital by
the first or the second month of next year. Between now and then, I expect to
improve my technique considerably. I trust that you yourself will not neglect
your practice. It would be a great shame if Yoshioka Kempō's flourishing school
were to suffer a second defeat like the one it sustained the last time I was there.
In closing, I send my respectful wishes for your continued good health.
       Shimmen Miyamoto Musashi Masana

      Though the letter was polite, it left little doubt as to Musashi's confidence
in himself. Having amended the address to include not only Seijūrō but all the
disciples in the school, he laid down his brush and gave the letter to Jōtarō.
     "Can I just throw it in at the school and come back?" the boy asked.
     "No. You must call at the front entrance and hand it personally to the
     servant there."
     "I understand."
     "There's something else I want you to do, but it may be a little difficult."
     "What is it?"
      "I want you to see if you can find the man who gave you the letter. His
name is Hon'iden Matahachi. He's an old friend of mine."
     "That should be no trouble at all."
     "You think not? Just how do you propose to do it?"
     "Oh, I'll ask around at all the drinking shops."
      Musashi laughed. "That's not a bad idea. I gather from Matahachi's letter,
however, that he knows somebody at the Yoshioka School. I think it would be
quicker to ask about him there."
      "What do I do when I find him?"
      "I want you to deliver a message. Tell him that from the first to the seventh
day of the new year, I'll go every morning to the great bridge at Gojō Avenue
and wait for him. Ask him to come on one of those days to meet me."
     "Is that all?"
     "Yes, but also tell him that I want very badly to see him."
     "All right, I think I have it. Where will you be when I come back?"
     "I'll tell you what. When I get to Nara, I'll arrange it so that you can find
     out where I am by asking at the Hōzōin. That's the temple that's famous for
     its
     lance technique."
     "You'll really do that?"
      "Ha, ha! You're still suspicious, aren't you? Don't worry. If I don't keep my
promise this time, you can cut off my head."
      Musashi was still laughing as he left the teahouse. Outside, he turned
toward Nara, and Jōtarō set off in the opposite direction, toward Kyoto.
      The crossroads was a jumble of people under basket hats, of swallows and
of neighing horses. As the boy made his way through the throng, he looked back
and saw Musashi standing where he had been, watching him. They smiled a
distant farewell, and each went on his way.
