The Nightingales


      There was no way of knowing how much stagnant rainwater might be at
the bottom of the thirty-foot moat. After diving into the hedge near the top and
rapidly sliding halfway down, Musashi stopped and threw a rock. Hearing no
splash, he leapt to the bottom, where he lay down on his back in the grass, not
making a sound.
      After a time his ribs stopped heaving and his pulse returned to normal. As
the sweat cooled, he began to breathe regularly again.
      "Otsū couldn't be here at Koyagyū!" he told himself. "My ears must be
playing tricks on me.... Still, it's not impossible. It could have been her."
      As he debated with himself, he envisioned Otsū's eyes among the stars
above him, and soon he was carried away by memories: Otsū at the pass on the
Mimasaka-Harima border, where she had said she could not live without him,
there was no other man in the world for her. Then at Hanada Bridge in Himeji,
when she had told him how she had waited for him for nearly a thousand days
and would have waited ten years, or twenty—until she was old and gray. Her
begging him to take her with him, her assertion that she could bear any hardship.
      His headlong flight at Himeji had been a betrayal. How she must have
hated him after that! How she must have bit her lips and cursed the
unpredictability of men.
      "Forgive me!" The words he had carved on the railing of the bridge slipped
from his lips. Tears seeped from the corners of his eyes.
      He was startled by a cry from the top of the moat. It sounded like, "He's
not here." Three or four pine torches flickered among the trees, then disappeared.
They hadn't spotted him.
      He was annoyed to find himself weeping. "What do I need with a
woman?" he said scornfully, wiping his eyes with his hands. He jumped to his
feet and looked up at the black outline of Koyagyū Castle.
      "They called me a coward, said I couldn't fight like a man! Well, I haven't
surrendered yet, not by a long shot. I didn't run away. I just made a tactical
retreat."
      Almost an hour had passed. He began walking slowly along the bottom of
the moat. "No point in fighting those four anyway. That wasn't my aim to begin

with. When I find Sekishūsai himself, then the real battle will start."
      He stopped and began gathering fallen branches, which he broke into short
sticks over his knee. Shoving them one by one into cracks in the stone wall, he
used them for footholds and climbed out of the moat.
      He could no longer hear the flute. For a second he had the vague feeling
Jōtarō was calling, but when he stopped and listened closely, he could hear
nothing. He wasn't really worried about the boy. He could take care of himself;
he was probably miles away by now. The absence of torches indicated the search
had been called off, at least for the night.
      The thought of finding and defeating Sekishūsai was once again his
controlling passion, the immediate shape taken by his overpowering desire for
recognition and honor.
      He had heard from the innkeeper that Sekishūsai's retreat was in neither of
the castle encirclements but in a secluded spot in the outer grounds. He walked
through the woods and valleys, at times suspecting he had strayed outside the
castle grounds. Then a bit of moat, a stone wall or a rice granary would reassure
him he was still inside.
      All night he searched, compelled by a diabolic urge. He intended, once he
had found the mountain house, to burst in with his challenge on his lips. But as
the hours wore on, he would have welcomed the sight of even a ghost appearing
in Sekishūsai's form.
      It was getting on toward daybreak when he found himself at the back gate
of the castle. Beyond it rose a precipice and above that Mount Kasagi. On the
verge of screaming with frustration, he retraced his steps southward. Finally, at
the bottom of a slope inclined toward the southeast quarter of the castle, well-
shaped trees and well-trimmed grass told him he'd found the hideaway. His
conjecture was soon confirmed by a gate, with a thatched roof, in the style
favored by the great tea master Sen no Rikyū. Inside he could make out a
bamboo grove shrouded in morning mist.
      Peeking through a crack in the gate, he saw that the path meandered
through the grove and up the hill, as in Zen Buddhist mountain retreats. For a
moment he was tempted to leap over the fence, but he checked himself;
something about the surroundings held him back. Was it the loving care that had
been lavished on the area, or the sight of white petals on the ground? Whatever it
was, the sensitivity of the occupant came through, and Musashi's agitation
subsided. He suddenly thought of his appearance. He must look like a tramp,
with his disheveled hair and his kimono in disarray.

       "No need to rush," he said to himself, conscious now of his exhaustion. He
had to pull himself together before presenting himself to the master inside.
       "Sooner or later," he thought, "someone's bound to come to the gate.
That'll be time enough. If he still refuses to see me as a wandering student, then
I'll use a different approach." He sat down under the eaves of the gate, leaned his
back against the post and dropped off to sleep.
       The stars were fading and white daisies swaying in the breeze when a large
drop of dew fell coldly on his neck and woke him up. Daylight had come, and as
he stirred from his nap, his head was cleansed by the morning breeze and the
singing of the nightingales. No vestige of weariness remained: he felt reborn.
       Rubbing his eyes and looking up, he saw the bright red sun climbing over
the mountains. He jumped up. The sun's heat had already rekindled his ardor,
and the strength stored up in his limbs demanded action. Stretching, he said
softly, "Today's the day."
       He was hungry, and for some reason this made him think about Jōtarō.
Perhaps he had treated the boy too roughly the night before, but it had been a
calculated move, a part of the lad's training. Musashi again assured himself that
Jōtarō, wherever he was, wasn't in any real danger.
       He listened to the sound of the brook, which ran down the mountainside,
detoured inside the fence, circled the bamboo grove and then emerged from
under the fence on its journey toward the lower castle grounds. Musashi washed
his face and drank his fill, in lieu of breakfast. The water was good, so good that
Musashi imagined it might well be the main reason Sekishūsai had chosen this
location for his retirement from the world. Still, knowing nothing of the art of
the tea ceremony, he had no inkling that water of such purity was in fact the
answer to a tea master's prayer.
       He rinsed his hand towel in the stream, and having wiped the back of his
neck thoroughly, cleaned the grime from his nails. He then tidied his hair with
the stiletto attached to his sword. Since Sekishūsai was not only the master of the
Yagyū Style but one of the greatest men in the land, Musashi intended to look his
best; he himself was nothing but a nameless warrior, as different from Sekishūsai
as the tiniest star is from the moon.
       Patting his hair and straightening his collar, he felt inwardly composed.
His mind was clear; he was resolved to knock at the gate like any legitimate
caller.
       The house was quite a way up the hill, and it wasn't likely an ordinary
knock would be heard. Looking around for a clapper of some kind, he saw a pair

of plaques, one on either side of the gate. They were beautifully inscribed, and
the carved writing had been filled in with a bluish clay which gave off a bronze-
like patina. On the right were the words:


           Be not suspicious, ye scribes,
           Of one who likes his castle closed.


      And on the left:


           No swordsman will you find here,
           Only the young nightingales in the fields.


       The poem was addressed to the "scribes," referring to the officials of the
castle, but its meaning was deeper. The old man had not shut his gate merely to
wandering students but to all the affairs of this world, to its honors as well as its
tribulations. He had put behind him worldly desire, both his own and that of
others.
       "I'm still young," thought Musashi. "Too young! This man is completely
beyond my reach."
       The desire to knock on the gate evaporated. Indeed, the idea of barging in
on the ancient recluse now seemed barbarian, and he felt totally ashamed of
himself.
       Only flowers and birds, the wind and the moon, should enter this gate.
Sekishūsai was no longer the greatest swordsman in the land, no longer the lord
of a fief, but a man who had returned to nature, renouncing the vanity of human
life. To upset his household would be a sacrilege. And what honor, what
distinction, could possibly be derived from defeating a man to whom honor and
distinction had become meaningless?
       "It's a good thing I read this," Musashi said to himself. "If I hadn't, I'd have
made a perfect fool of myself!"
       With the sun now fairly high in the sky, the nightingales' singing had
subsided. From a distance up the hill came the sound of rapid footsteps.
Apparently frightened by the clatter, a flock of little birds arced up into the sky.

Musashi peeped through the gate to see who was coming.
       It was Otsū.
       So it had been her flute he had heard! Should he wait and meet her? Go
away? "I want to talk with her," he thought. "I must!"
       Indecision seized him. His heart palpitated and his self-confidence fled.
Otsū ran down the path to a point a few feet from where he stood. Then she
stopped and turned back, uttering a little cry of surprise.
       "I thought he was right behind me," she murmured, looking all around.
Then she ran back up the hill, calling, "Jōtarō! Where are you?"
       Hearing her voice, Musashi flushed with embarrassment and began to
sweat. His lack of confidence disgusted him. He couldn't move from his hiding
place in the shadow of the trees.
       After a short interval, Otsū called again, and this time there was an answer.
       "I'm here. Where are you?" shouted Jōtarō from the upper part of the
grove. "Over here!" she replied. "I told you not to wander off like that."
      Jōtarō came running toward her. "Oh, is this where you are?" he exclaimed.
      "Didn't I tell you to follow me?"
      "Well, I did, but then I saw a pheasant, so I chased it."
      "Of all things, chasing after a pheasant! Did you forget you have to go look
      for somebody important this morning?"
      "Oh, I'm not worried about him. He's not the kind to get hurt."
      "Well, that's not the way it was last night when you came running to my
      room. You were ready to burst into tears."
      "I was not! It just happened so fast, I didn't know what to do."
      "I didn't either, especially after you told me your teacher's name." "But how
      do you know Musashi?"
      "We come from the same village."
      "Is that all?"
      "Of course that's all."
      "That's funny. I don't see why you should start crying just because
      somebody from the same village turned up here."
      "Was I crying that much?"
       "How can you remember everything I did, when you can't remember what
you did yourself? Anyway, I guess I was pretty scared. If it'd just been a matter
of four ordinary men against my teacher, I wouldn't have worried, but they say
all of them are experts. When I heard the flute I remembered you were here in
the castle, so I thought maybe if I could apologize to his lordship—"

       "If you heard me playing, Musashi must have heard it too. He may even
have known it was me." Her voice softened. "I was thinking of him as I played."
       "I don't see what difference that makes. Anyway, I could tell from the
sound of the flute where you were."
       "And that was quite a performance—storming into the house and
screaming about a 'battle' going on somewhere. His lordship was pretty
shocked."
       "But he's a nice man. When I told him I'd killed Tarō, he didn't get mad
like all the others."
       Suddenly realizing she was wasting time, Otsū hurried toward the gate.
"We can talk later," she said. "Right now there are more important things to do.
We've got to find Musashi. Sekishūsai even broke his own rule by saying he'd
like to meet the man who'd done what you said."
       Otsū looked as cheerful as a flower. In the bright sun of early summer, her
cheeks shone like ripening fruit. She sniffed at the young leaves and felt their
freshness fill her lungs.
       Musashi, hidden in the trees, watched her intently, marveling at how
healthy she looked. The Otsū he saw now was very different from the girl who
had sat dejectedly on the porch of the Shippōji, looking out at the world with
vacant eyes. The difference was that then Otsū had had no one to love. Or at
least, such love as she had felt had been vague and difficult to pin down. She had
been a sentimental child, self-conscious about being an orphan, and somewhat
resentful of the fact.
       Coming to know Musashi, having him to look up to, had given birth to the
love that now dwelt inside her and gave meaning to her life. During the long
year she'd spent wandering around in search of him, body and mind had
developed the courage to face anything fate might fling at her.
       Quickly perceiving her new vitality and how beautiful it made her,
Musashi yearned to take her somewhere where they could be alone and tell her
everything—how he longed for her, how he needed her physically. He wanted to
reveal that hidden in his heart of steel was a weakness; he wanted to retract the
words he had carved on Hanada Bridge. If no one were to know, he could show
her how tender he could be. He would tell her he felt the same love for her that
she felt for him. He could hug her, rub his cheek against hers, cry the tears he
wanted to cry. He was strong enough now to admit to himself that these feelings
were real.
       Things Otsū had said to him in the past came back to him and he saw how

cruel and ugly it was for him to reject the simple, straightforward love she had
offered.
       He was miserable, yet there was something in him that couldn't surrender
to these feelings, something that told him it was wrong. He was two different
men, one longing to call out to Otsū, the other telling him he was a fool. He
couldn't be sure which was his real self. Staring from behind the tree, lost in
indecision, he seemed to see two paths ahead, one of light and another of
darkness.
      Otsū, unaware of his presence, walked a few paces out from the gate.
      Looking back, she saw Jōtarō stooping to pick something up.
      "Jōtarō, what on earth are you doing? Hurry up!"
      "Wait!" he cried excitedly. "Look at this!"
      "It's nothing but a dirty old rag! What do you want that for?"
      "It belongs to Musashi."
      "To Musashi?" she exclaimed, running back to him.
       "Yes, it's his," replied Jōtarō as he held the hand towel up by the corners
for her to see. "I remember it. It came from the widow's house where we stayed
in Nara. See, here: there's a maple leaf design dyed on it and a character reading
'Lin.' That's the name of the owner of the dumpling restaurant there."
       "Do you think Musashi was right here?" Otsū cried, looking frantically
around.
       Jōtarō drew himself up almost to the girl's height and at the top of his
voice yelled, "Sensei!"
      In the grove there was a rustling sound. With a gasp, Otsū spun around and
      darted toward the trees, the boy chasing after her.
      "Where are you going?" he called.
      "Musashi just ran away!"
      "Which way?"
      "That way."
      "I don't see him."
      "Over there in the trees!"
       She had caught a glimpse of Musashi's figure, but the momentary joy she
experienced was immediately replaced by apprehension, for he was rapidly
increasing the distance between them. She ran after him with all the strength her
legs possessed. Jōtarō ran along with her, not really believing she'd seen
Musashi.
      "You're wrong!" he shouted. "It must be somebody else. Why would

      Musashi run away?"
      "Just look!"
      "Where?"
       "There!" She took a deep breath, and straining her voice to the utmost,
screamed, "Mu—sa—shi!" But no more had the frantic cry come from her lips
than she stumbled and fell. As Jōtarō helped her up, she cried, "Why don't you
call him too? Call him! Call him!"
       Instead of doing as she said, he froze in shock and stared at her face. He
had seen that face before, with its bloodshot eyes, its needlelike eyebrows, its
waxen nose and jaw. It was the face of the mask! The madwoman's mask the
widow in Nara had given him. Otsū's face lacked the curiously curved mouth,
but otherwise the likeness was the same. He quickly withdrew his hands and
recoiled in fright.
       Otsū continued her scolding. "We can't give up! He'll never come back if
we let him get away now! Call him! Get him to come back!"
       Something inside Jōtarō resisted, but the look on Otsū's face told him it
was useless to try to reason with her. They started running again, and he, too,
began to shout for all he was worth.
       Beyond the woods was a low hill, along the bottom of which ran the back
road from Tsukigase to Iga. "It is Musashi!" cried Jōtarō. Having reached the
road, the boy could see his master clearly, but Musashi was too far ahead of them
to hear their shouts.
       Otsū and Jōtarō ran as far as their legs would carry them, shouting
themselves hoarse. Their screams echoed through the fields. At the edge of the
valley they lost sight of Musashi, who ran straight into the heavily wooded
foothills.
       They stopped and stood there, forlorn as deserted children. White clouds
stretched out emptily above them, while the murmuring of a stream accented
their loneliness.
       "He's crazy! He's out of his mind! How could he leave me like this?"
Jōtarō cried, stamping the ground.
       Otsū leaned against a large chestnut tree and let the tears gush forth. Even
her great love for Musashi—a love for which she would have sacrificed anything
—was incapable of holding him. She was puzzled, bereft and angry. She knew
what his purpose in life was, and why he was avoiding her. She had known since
that day at Hanada Bridge. Still, she could not comprehend why he considered
her a barrier between him and his goal. Why should his determination be

weakened by her presence?
      Or was that just an excuse? Was the real reason that he didn't like her
enough? It would make more sense perhaps. And yet ... and yet ... Otsū had
come to understand Musashi when she had seen him tied up in the tree at the
Shippōji. She could not believe him to be the sort who would lie to a woman. If
he didn't care about her, he would say so, but in fact he had told her at Hanada
Bridge that he did like her very much. She recalled his words with sadness.
      Being an orphan, she was prevented by a certain coldness from trusting
many people, but once she trusted someone, she trusted him completely. At this
moment, she felt there was no one but Musashi worth living for or relying on.
Matahachi's betrayal had taught her, the hard way, how careful a girl must be in
judging men. But Musashi was not Matahachi. She had not only decided that she
would live for him, whatever happened, but had already made up her mind never
to regret doing so.
      But why couldn't he have said just one word? It was more than she could
bear. The leaves of the chestnut tree were shaking, as though the tree itself
understood and sympathized.
      The angrier she became, the more she was possessed by her love for him.
Whether it was fate or not, she couldn't say, but her grief-torn spirit told her there
was no real life for her apart from Musashi.
      Jōtarō glanced down the road and muttered, "Here comes a priest." Otsū
paid no attention to him.
      With the approach of noon, the sky above had turned a deep, transparent
blue. The monk descending the slope in the distance had the look of having
stepped down from the clouds, of having no connection whatever with this earth.
As he neared the chestnut tree, he looked toward it and saw Otsū.
      "What's all this?" he exclaimed, and at the sound of his voice, Otsū looked
up.
      Her swollen eyes wide with astonishment, she cried, "Takuan!" In her
present condition, she saw Takuan Sōhō as a savior. She wondered if she was
dreaming.
      Although the sight of Takuan was a shock to Otsū, the discovery of Otsū
was for Takuan no more than confirmation of something he had suspected. As it
happened, his arrival was neither accident nor miracle.
      Takuan had been on friendly terms with the Yagyū family for a long time,
his acquaintance with them going back to the days when, as a young monk at the
Sangen'in in the Daitokuji, his duties had included cleaning the kitchen and

making bean paste.
       In those days, the Sangen'in, then known as the "North Sector" of the
Daitokuji, had been famous as a gathering place for "unusual" samurai, which is
to say, samurai who were given to thinking philosophically about the meaning of
life and death; men who felt the need to study affairs of the spirit, as well as the
technical skills of the martial arts. Samurai flocked' there in greater numbers
than did Zen monks, and one result of this was that the temple became known as
a breeding ground for revolt.
       Among the samurai who came frequently were Suzuki Ihaku, the brother
of Lord Kōizumi of Ise; Yagyū Gorōzaemon, the heir of the House of Yagyū;
and Gorōzaemon's brother Munenori. Munenori had quickly taken a liking to
Takuan, and the two had remained friends ever since. In the course of a number
of visits to Koyagyū Castle, Takuan had met Sekishūsai and had acquired great
respect for the older man. Sekishūsai had also taken a liking to the young monk,
who struck him as having a great deal of promise.
       Recently Takuan had stopped for a time at the Nansōji in Izumi Province
and from there had sent a letter to inquire after the health of Sekishūsai and
Munenori. He had received a long reply from Sekishūsai, saying in part:


      I have been very fortunate lately. Munenori has taken a post with the
Tokugawas, in Edo, and my grandson, who left the service of Lord Katō of Higo
and went out to study on his own, is making progress. I myself have in my service
a beautiful young girl who not only plays the flute well but talks with me, and
together we have tea, arrange flowers and compose poems. She is the delight of
my old age, a flower blooming in what might otherwise be a cold, withered old
hut. Since she says that she comes from Mimasaka, which is near your
birthplace, and was brought up in a temple called the Shippōji, I imagine that
you and she have much in common. It is unusually pleasant to drink one's
evening sake to the accompaniment of a flute well played, and since you are so
close to here, I hope you will come and enjoy this treat with me.


      It would have been difficult for Takuan to refuse the invitation under any
circumstances, but the certainty that the girl described in the letter was Otsū
made him all the more eager to accept.
      As the three of them walked toward Sekishūsai's house, Takuan asked Otsū

many questions, which she answered without reservation. She told him what
she'd been doing since last seeing him in Himeji, what had happened that
morning, and how she felt about Musashi.
       Nodding patiently, he heard out her tearful story. When she was finished,
he said, "I guess women are able to choose ways of life that would not be
possible for men. You want me, I take it, to advise you on the path that you
should follow in the future."
      "Oh, no."
      "Well..."
      "I've already decided what I'm going to do."
       Takuan scrutinized her closely. She had stopped walking and was looking
at the ground. She seemed to be in the depths of despair, yet there was a certain
strength in the tone of her voice that forced Takuan to a reappraisal.
       "If I'd had any doubts, if I'd thought I'd give up," she said, "I'd never have
left the Shippōji. I'm still determined to meet Musashi. The only question in my
mind is whether this will cause him trouble, whether my continuing to live will
bring him unhappiness. If it does, I'll have to do something about it!"
      "Just what does that mean?"
      "I can't tell you."
      "Be careful, Otsū!"
      "Of what?"
      "Under this bright, cheerful sun, the god of death is tugging at you." "I ... I
      don't know what you mean."
       "I don't suppose you would, but that's because the god of death is lending
you strength. You'd be a fool to die, Otsū, particularly over nothing more than a
one-sided love affair." Takuan laughed.
       Otsū was getting angry again. She might as well have been talking to thin
air, she thought, for Takuan had never been in love. It was impossible for anyone
who'd never been in love to understand how she felt. For her to try to explain her
feelings to him was like him trying to explain Zen Buddhism to an imbecile. But
just as there was truth in Zen, whether an imbecile could understand it or not,
there were people who would die for love, whether Takuan could understand it
or not. To a woman at least, love was a far more serious matter than the
troublesome riddles of a Zen priest. When one was swayed by a love that meant
life or death, what difference did it make what the clapping of one hand sounded
like? Biting her lips, Otsū vowed to say no more.
       Takuan became serious. "You should have been born a man, Otsū. A man

with the kind of willpower you have would certainly accomplish something for
the good of the country."
       "Does that mean it's wrong for a woman like me to exist? Because it might
bring harm to Musashi?"
       "Don't twist what I said. I wasn't talking about that. But no matter how
much you love Musashi, he still runs away, doesn't he? And I daresay you never
will catch him!"
       "I'm not doing this because I enjoy it. I can't help it. I love him!"
       "I don't see you for a while, and the next thing I know, you're carrying on
like all the other women!"
       "But can't you see? Oh, never mind, let's not talk about it anymore. A
brilliant priest like you would never understand a woman's feelings!"
       "I don't know how to answer that. It's true, though; women do puzzle me."
Otsū turned away from him and said, "Let's go, Jōtarō!"
       As Takuan stood watching, the two of them started down a side road. With
a sad flicker of his eyebrows, the monk came to the conclusion that there was
nothing more for him to do. He called after her, "Aren't you going to say good-
bye to Sekishūsai before setting out on your own?"
      "I'll say good-bye to him in my heart. He knows I never meant to stay at his
      house this long anyway."
      "Won't you reconsider?"
      "Reconsider what?"
       "Well, it was nice living in the mountains of Mimasaka, but it's nice here
too. It's peaceful and quiet, and life is simple. Instead of seeing you go out in the
ordinary world, with all its misery and hardships, I'd like to see you live your life
out in peace, among these mountains and streams, like those nightingales we
hear singing."
       "Ha, ha! Thanks so much, Takuan!"
       Takuan sighed, realizing he was helpless before this strong-willed young
woman, so determined to go blindly on her chosen way. "You may laugh, Otsū,
but the path you are embarking on is one of darkness."
       "Darkness?"
       "You were brought up in a temple. You should know that the path of
darkness and desire leads only to frustration and misery—frustration and misery
beyond salvation."
       "There's never been a path of light for me, not since I was born."
       "But there is, there is!" Putting his last drop of energy into this plea,

Takuan came up to the girl and took her hand. He wanted desperately for her to
trust him.
       "I'll talk to Sekishūsai about it," he offered. "About how you can live and
be happy. You can find yourself a good husband here in Koyagyū, have children,
and do the things that women do. You'd make this a better village. That would
make you happier too."
       "I understand you're trying to be helpful, but—"
       "Do it! I beg you!"
       Pulling her by the hand, he looked at Jōtarō and said, "You come too,
boy!" Jōtarō shook his head decisively. "Not me. I'm going to follow my master."
"Well, do as you like, but at least go back to the castle and say good-bye to
Sekishūsai."
       "Oh, I forgot!" gasped Jōtarō. "I left my mask there. I'll go get it." He
streaked off, untroubled by paths of darkness and paths of light.
       Otsū, however, stood still at the crossroads. Takuan relaxed, becoming
again the old friend she had known before. He warned her of the dangers lurking
in the life she was trying to lead and tried to convince her there were other ways
to find happiness. Otsū remained unmoved.
       Presently Jōtarō came running back with the mask over his face. Takuan
froze when he saw it, instinctively feeling that this was the future face of Otsū,
the one he would see after she had suffered on her long journey along the path of
darkness.
       "I'll go now," said Otsū, stepping away from him.
       Jōtarō, clinging to her sleeve, said, "Yes, let's go! Now!"
       Takuan lifted his eyes to the white clouds, lamenting his failure. "There's
nothing more I can do," he said. "The Buddha himself despaired of saving
women."
       "Good-bye, Takuan," said Otsū. "I'm bowing here to Sekishūsai, but would
you also tell him thank you and good-bye for me?"
       "Ah, even I'm beginning to think priests are crazy. Everywhere they go,
they meet no one but people rushing toward hell." Takuan raised his hands, let
them drop and said very solemnly, "Otsū, if you begin to drown in the Six Evil
Ways or the Three Crossings, call out my name. Think of me, and call my name!
Until then, all I can say is, travel on as far as you can and try to be careful!"
