Jōtarō’s Revenge


      On his return to the inn, Jōtarō sat down before Musashi and with a smug
look reported that he had carried out his mission. Several scratches crisscrossed
the boy's face, and his nose looked like a ripe strawberry. No doubt he was in
some pain, but since he offered no explanation, Musashi asked no questions.
      "Here's their reply," said Jōtarō, handing Musashi the letter from Shōda
Kizaemon and adding a few words about his meeting with the samurai, but
saying nothing about the dog. As he spoke, his wounds started to bleed again.
      "Will that be all?" he asked.
      "Yes, that's all. Thanks."
      As Musashi opened Kizaemon's letter, Jōtarō put his hands to his face and
hurriedly left the room. Kocha caught up with him and examined his scratches
with worried eyes.
     "How did that happen?" she asked.
     "A dog jumped on me."
     "Whose dog was it?"
     "One of the dogs at the castle."
      "Oh, was it that big black Kishū hound? He's vicious. I'm sure, strong as
you are, you wouldn't be able to handle him. Why, he's bitten prowlers to death!"
      Although they were not on the best of terms, Kocha led him to the stream
out back and made him wash his face. Then she went and fetched some
ointment, which she applied to his face. For once, Jōtarō behaved like a
gentleman. When she had finished her ministrations, he bowed and thanked her
over and over again.
     "Stop bobbing your head up and down. You're a man, after all, and it looks
     ridiculous."
     "But I appreciate what you've done."
     "Even if we do fight a lot, I still like you," she confessed.
     "I like you too."
     "Really?"
      The parts of Jōtarō's face that showed between the patches of ointment
turned crimson, and Kocha's cheeks burst into subdued flame. There was no one
around. The sun shone through the pink peach blossoms.

       "Your master will probably be going away soon, won't he?" she asked with
       a trace of disappointment.
       "We'll be here for a while yet," he replied reassuringly.
       "I wish you could stay for a year or two."
        The two went into the shed where the fodder for the horses was kept and
lay down on their backs in the hay. Their hands touched, sending a warm tingle
through Jōtarō. Quite without warning, he pulled Kocha's hand toward him and
bit her finger.
       "Ouch!"
       "Did that hurt? I'm sorry."
       "It's all right. Do it again."
       "You don't mind?"
       "No, no, go on and bite! Bite harder!"
        He did just that, tugging at her fingers like a puppy. Hay was falling over
their heads, and soon they were hugging each other, just for the sake of hugging,
when Kocha's father came looking for her. Appalled at what he saw, his face
took on the stern expression of a Confucian sage.
        "You idiots, what are you up to? Both of you, still only children!" He
dragged them out by the scruff of the neck and gave Kocha a couple of smart
whacks on the behind.
        The rest of that day, Musashi said very little to anyone. He sat with his
arms folded and thought.
        Once, in the middle of the night, Jōtarō woke up and, raising his head a
little, stole a look at his master. Musashi was lying in bed with his eyes wide
open, staring at the ceiling with intense concentration.
        The next day, too, Musashi kept to himself. Jōtarō was frightened; his
master might have heard about his playing with Kocha in the shed. Nothing was
said, however. Late in the afternoon, Musashi sent the boy to ask for their bill
and was making preparations to depart when the clerk brought it. Asked if he
would need dinner, he said no.
       Kocha, standing idly in a corner, asked, "Won't you be coming back to sleep
       here tonight?"
       "No. Thank you, Kocha, for taking such good care of us. I'm sure we've
       been a lot of trouble for you. Good-bye."
       "Take good care of yourself," said Kocha. She was holding her hands over
       her face, hiding her tears.
        At the gate, the manager of the inn and the other maids lined up to see

them off. Their setting off just before sunset seemed very odd.
       After walking a bit, Musashi looked around for Jōtarō. Not seeing him, he
turned back toward the inn, where the boy was under the storehouse, saying
farewell to Kocha. When they saw Musashi approaching, they drew hastily away
from each other.
       "Good-bye," said Kocha.
       "Bye," called Jōtarō, as he ran to Musashi's side. Though fearful of
Musashi's eyes, the boy could not resist stealing backward glances until the inn
was out of sight.
       Lights began to appear in the valley. Musashi, saying nothing and not once
looking back, strode on ahead. Jōtarō followed along glumly.
      After a time, Musashi asked, "Aren't we there yet?"
      "Where?"
      "At the main gate of Koyagyū Castle."
      "Are we going to the castle?"
      "Yes."
      "Will we stay there tonight?"
      "I have no idea. That depends on how things turn out."
      "There it is. That's the gate."
       Musashi stopped and stood before the gate, feet together. Above the moss-
grown ramparts, the huge trees made a soughing sound. A single light streamed
from a square window.
       Musashi called out, and a guard appeared. Giving him the letter from
Shōda Kizaemon, he said, "My name is Musashi, and I've come on Shōda's
invitation. Would you please tell him that I'm here?"
       The guard had been expecting him. "They're waiting for you," he said,
motioning for Musashi to follow him.
       In addition to its other functions, the Shin'indō was the place where the
young people in the castle studied Confucianism. It also served as the fief's
library. The rooms along the passageway to the rear of the building were all lined
with bookshelves, and though the fame of the House of Yagyū stemmed from its
military prowess, Musashi could see it also placed great emphasis on
scholarship. Everything about the castle seemed to be steeped in history.
       And everything seemed to be well run, to judge from the neatness of the
road from the gate to the Shin'indō, the courteous demeanor of the guard, and the
austere, peaceful lighting visible in the vicinity of the keep.
       Sometimes, upon entering a house for the first time, a visitor has the

feeling he's already familiar with the place and its inhabitants. Musashi had that
impression now, as he sat down on the wooden floor of the large room to which
the guard brought him. After offering him a hard round cushion of woven straw,
which he accepted with thanks, the guard left him alone. On the way, Jōtarō had
been dropped off at the attendants' waiting room.
       The guard returned a few minutes later and told Musashi that his host
would arrive soon.
       Musashi slid the round cushion over to a corner and leaned back against a
post. From the light of the low lamp shining into the garden, he saw trellises of
blossoming wisteria vines, both white and lavender. The sweetish scent of
wisteria was in the air. He was startled by the croak of a frog, the first he had
heard that year.
       Water gurgled somewhere in the garden; the stream apparently ran under
the building, for after he was settled, he noticed the sound of flowing water
beneath him. Indeed, before long it seemed to him that the sound of water was
coming from the walls, the ceiling, even the lamp. He felt cool and relaxed. Yet
simmering deep inside him there was an unsuppressible sense of disquiet. It was
his insatiable fighting spirit, coursing through his veins even in this quiet
atmosphere. From his cushion by the post, he looked questioningly at his
surroundings.
       "Who is Yagyū?" he thought defiantly. "He's a swordsman, and I'm a
swordsman. In this respect we are equal. But tonight I will advance a step farther
and put Yagyū behind me."
       "Sorry to have kept you waiting."
       Shōda Kizaemon entered the room with Kimura, Debuchi and Murata.
"Welcome to Koyagyū," Kizaemon said warmly.
       After the other three men had introduced themselves, servants brought in
trays of sake and snacks. The sake was a thick, rather syrupy, local brew, served
in large old-style sake bowls with high stems.
       "Here in the country," said Kizaemon, "we aren't able to offer you much,
but please feel at home."
       The others too, with great cordiality, invited him to make himself
comfortable, not to stand on ceremony.
       With a little urging, Musashi accepted some sake, though he was not
particularly fond of it. It was not so much that he disliked it as that he was still
too young to appreciate its subtlety. The sake this evening was palatable enough
but had little immediate effect on him.

       "Looks as though you know how to drink," said Kimura Sukekurō,
offering to refill his cup. "By the way, I hear the peony you asked about the other
day was cut by the lord of this castle himself."
       Musashi slapped his knee. "I thought so!" he exclaimed. "It was splendid!"
Kimura moved closer. "What I'd like to know is just how you could tell that
      the cut in that soft, thin stem had been made by a master swordsman. We,
      all
      of us, were deeply impressed by your ability to discern that."
      Uncertain as to where the conversation was leading, Musashi said, to gain
      time, "You were? Really?"
      "Yes, no mistake about it!" said Kizaemon, Debuchi and Murata almost
      simultaneously.
       "We ourselves couldn't see anything special about it," said Kizaemon. "We
arrived at the conclusion that it must take a genius to recognize another genius.
We think it would be of great help in our future studies if you'd explain it to us."
      Musashi, taking another sip of sake, said, "Oh, it wasn't anything in
      particular—just a lucky guess."
      "Come now, don't be modest."
      "I'm not being modest. It was a feeling I got—from the look of the cut."
      "Just what sort of feeling was it?"
       As they would with any stranger, these four senior disciples of the House
of Yagyū were trying to analyze Musashi as a human being and at the same time
test him. They had already taken note of his physique, admiring his carriage and
the expression in his eyes. But the way he held his sake cup and his chopsticks
betrayed his country upbringing and made them inclined to be patronizing. After
only three or four cups of sake, Musashi's face turned copper red. Embarrassed,
he touched his hand to his forehead and cheeks two or three times. The
boyishness of the gesture made them laugh.
       "This feeling of yours," repeated Kizaemon. "Can't you tell us more about
it? You know, this building, the Shin'indō, was built expressly for Lord Kōizumi
of Ise to stay in during his visits. It's an important building in the history of
swordsmanship. It's a fitting place for us to hear a lecture from you tonight."
       Realizing that protesting their flattery was not going to get him off the
hook, Musashi decided to take the plunge.
       "When you sense something you sense it," he said. "There's really no way
to explain it. If you want me to demonstrate what I mean, you'll have to
unsheathe your sword and face me in a match. There's no other way."

       The smoke from the lamp rose as black as squid ink in the still night air.
The croaking frog was heard again.
       Kizaemon and Debuchi, the two eldest, looked at each other and laughed.
Though he had spoken quietly, the statement about testing him had undeniably
been a challenge, and they recognized it as such.
       Letting it pass without comment, they talked about swords, then about
Zen, events in other provinces, the Battle of Sekigahara. Kizaemon, Debuchi and
Kimura had all taken part in the bloody conflict, and to Musashi, who had been
on the opposing side, their stories had the ring of bitter truth. The hosts appeared
to be enjoying the conversation immensely, and Musashi found it fascinating just
to listen.
       He was nonetheless conscious of the swift passage of time, knowing in his
heart that if he did not meet Sekishūsai tonight, he would never meet him.
       Kizaemon announced it was time for the barley mixed with rice, the
customary last course, to be served, and the sake was removed.
       "How can I see him?" thought Musashi. It became increasingly clear that
he might be forced to employ some underhanded scheme. Should he goad one of
his hosts into losing his temper? Difficult, when he was not angry himself, so he
purposefully disagreed several times with what was being said and spoke in a
rude and brash manner. Shōda and Debuchi chose to laugh at this. None of these
four was about to be provoked into doing anything rash.
       Desperation set in. Musashi could not bear the idea of leaving without
accomplishing his objective. For his crown, he wanted a brilliant star of victory,
and for the record, he wanted it known that Musashi had been here, had gone,
had left his mark on the House of Yagyū. With his own sword, he wanted to
bring Sekishūsai, this great patriarch of the martial arts, this "ancient dragon" as
he was called, to his knees.
       Had they seen through him completely? He was considering this
possibility when matters took an unexpected turn.
       "Did you hear that?" asked Kimura.
       Murata went out on the veranda, then, reentering the room, said, "Tarō's
barking—not his usual bark, though. I think something must be wrong."
       Tarō was the dog Jōtarō had had a run-in with. There was no denying that
the barking, which seemed to come from the second encirclement of the castle,
was frightening. It sounded too loud and terrible to be coming from a single dog.
       Debuchi said, "I think I'd better have a look. Forgive me, Musashi, for
spoiling the party, but it may be important. Please go on without me."

       Shortly after he left, Murata and Kimura excused themselves, politely
begging Musashi's forgiveness.
       The barking grew more urgent; the dog was apparently trying to give
warning of some danger. When one of the castle's dogs acted this way, it was
almost a sure sign something untoward was going on. The peace the country was
enjoying was not so secure that a daimyō could afford to relax his vigilance
against neighboring fiefs. There were still unscrupulous warriors who might
stoop to anything to satisfy their own ambition, and spies roamed the land
searching out complacent and vulnerable targets.
       Kizaemon seemed extremely upset. He kept staring at the ominous light of
the little lamp, as if counting the echoes of the unearthly noise.
      Eventually there was one long, mournful wail. Kizaemon grunted and
      looked at Musashi.
      "He's dead," said Musashi.
      "Yes, he's been killed." No longer able to contain himself, Kizaemon stood
      up. "I can't understand it."
       He started to leave, but Musashi stopped him, saying, "Wait. Is Jōtarō, the
boy who came with me, still in the waiting room?"
       They directed their inquiry to a young samurai in front of the Shin'indō,
who after searching reported the boy was nowhere to be found.
       A look of concern came over Musashi's face. Turning to Kizaemon, he
said, "I think I know what happened. Would you mind my going with you?"
       "Not at all."
       About three hundred yards from the dōjō, a crowd had gathered, and
several torches had been lit. Besides Murata, Debuchi and Kimura, there were a
number of foot soldiers and guards, forming a black circle, all talking and
shouting at once.
       From the outer rim of the circle, Musashi peered into the open space in the
middle. His heart sank. There, just as he had feared, was Jōtarō, covered with
blood and looking like the devil's own child—wooden sword in hand, his teeth
tightly clenched, his shoulders rising and falling with his heavy breathing.
       By his side lay Tarō, teeth bared, legs outstretched. The dog's sightless
eyes reflected the light of the torches; blood trickled from his mouth.
       "It's his lordship's dog," someone said mournfully.
       A samurai went toward Jōtarō and shouted, "You little bastard! What have
you done? Are you the one who killed this dog?" The man brought his hand
down in a furious slap, which Jōtarō just managed to dodge.

      Squaring his shoulders, he shouted defiantly, "Yes, I did it!"
      "You admit it?"
      "I had a reason!"
      "Ha!"
      "I was taking revenge."
       "What?" There was general astonishment at Jōtarō's answer; the whole
crowd was angry. Tar() was the favorite pet of Lord Munenori of Tajima. Not
only that; he was the pedigreed offspring of Raiko, a bitch belonging to and
much loved by Lord Yorinori of Kishū. Lord Yorinori had personally given the
pup to Munenori, who had himself reared it. The slaying of the animal would
consequently be investigated thoroughly, and the fate of the two samurai who
had been paid to take good care of the dog was now in jeopardy.
       The man now facing Jōtarō was one of these two.
       "Shut up!" he shouted, aiming his fist at Jōtarō's head. This time Jōtarō did
not duck in time. The blow landed in the vicinity of his ear.
       Jōtarō raised his hand to feel his wound. "What are you doing?" he
screamed.
       "You killed the master's dog. You don't mind if I beat you to death the
same way, do you? Because that's exactly what I'm going to do."
       "All I did was get even with him. Why punish me for that? A grown man
should know that's not right!"
       In Jōtarō's view, he had only protected his honor, and risked his life in
doing so, for a visible wound was a great disgrace to a samurai. To defend his
pride, there was no alternative to killing the dog: indeed, in all likelihood he had
expected to be praised for his valiant conduct. He stood his ground, determined
not to flinch.
       "Shut your impudent mouth!" screamed the keeper. "I don't care if you are
only a child. You're old enough to know the difference between a dog and a
human being. The very idea—taking revenge on a dumb animal!"
       He grabbed Jōtarō's collar, looked to the crowd for approval, and declared
it his duty to punish the dog's murderer. The crowd silently nodded in agreement.
The four men who had so recently been entertaining Musashi looked distressed
but said nothing.
       "Bark, boy! Bark like a dog!" the keeper shouted. He swung Jōtarō around
and around by his collar and with a black look in his eye threw him to the
ground. Seizing an oak staff, he raised it above his head ready to strike.
       "You killed the dog, you little hoodlum. Now it's your turn! Stand up so I

can kill you! Bark! Bite me!"
       Teeth tightly clenched, Jōtarō propped himself up on one arm and
struggled to his feet, wooden sword in hand. His features had not lost their
spritelike quality, but the expression on his face was anything but childlike, and
the howl that issued from his throat was eerily savage.
       When an adult gets angry, he often regrets it later, but when a child's wrath
is aroused, not even the mother who brought him into the world can placate him.
       "Kill me!" he screamed. "Go on, kill me!"
       "Die, then!" raged the keeper. He struck.
       The blow would have killed the boy if it had connected, but it didn't. A
sharp crack reverberated in the ears of the bystanders, and Jōtarō's wooden
sword went flying through the air. Without thinking about it, he had parried the
keeper's blow.
       Weaponless, he closed his eyes and charged blindly at the enemy's midriff,
latching on to the man's obi with his teeth. Holding on for dear life, he tore with
his nails at the keeper's groin, while the keeper made futile swings with his staff.
       Musashi had remained silent, arms folded and face expressionless, but then
another oak staff appeared. A second man had dashed into the ring and was on
the verge of attacking Jōtarō from behind. Musashi moved into action. His arms
came down and in no time he forced his way through the solid wall of men into
the arena.
       "Coward!" he shouted at the second man.
       An oak stick and two legs described an arc in the air, coming to rest in a
clump about four yards away.
       Musashi shouted, "And now for you, you little devil!" Gripping Jōtarō's
obi with both hands, he lifted the boy above his head and held him there.
Turning to the keeper, who was taking a fresh grip on his staff, he said, "I've
been watching this from the start, and I think you're going about it the wrong
way. This boy is my servant, and if you're going to question him, you ought to
question me too."
       In fiery tones, the keeper answered, "All right, we'll do that. We'll question
the two of you!"
       "Good! We'll take you on together. Now, here's the boy!"
       He threw Jōtarō straight at the man. The crowd let out an appalled gasp
and fell back. Was the man mad? Who ever heard of using one human being as a
weapon against another human?
       The keeper stared in disbelief as Jōtarō sailed through the air and rammed

into his chest. The man fell straight back, as though a prop holding him up had
suddenly been removed. It was difficult to tell whether he had struck his head
against a rock, or whether his ribs had been broken. Hitting the ground with a
howl, he began vomiting blood. Jōtarō bounced off the man's chest, did a
somersault in the air, and rolled like a ball to a point twenty or thirty feet away.
       "Did you see that?" a man shouted.
       "Who is this crazy rōnin?"
       The fracas no longer involved only the dog's keeper; the other samurai
began abusing Musashi. Most of them were unaware that Musashi was an
invited guest, and several suggested killing him then and there.
       "Now," said Musashi, "everybody listen!"
       They watched him closely as he took Jōtarō's wooden sword in his hand
and faced them, a terrifying scowl on his face.
       "The child's crime is his master's crime. We are both prepared to pay for it.
But first let me tell you this: we have no intention of letting ourselves be killed
like dogs. We are prepared to take you on."
       Instead of acknowledging the crime and taking his punishment, he was
challenging them! If at this point Musashi had apologized for Jōtarō and spoken
in his defense, if he had made even the slightest effort to soothe the ruffled
feelings of the Yagyū samurai, the whole incident might have passed by quietly.
But Musashi's attitude precluded this. He seemed set on creating a still greater
disturbance.
       Shōda, Kimura, Debuchi and Murata all frowned, wondering anew what
sort of freak they had invited to the castle. Deploring his lack of sense, they
gradually edged around the crowd while keeping a watchful eye on him.
      The crowd had been seething to begin with, and Musashi's challenge
      exacerbated their anger.
      "Listen to him! He's an outlaw!"
      "He's a spy! Tie him up!"
      "No, cut him up!"
      "Don't let him get away!"
       For a moment it looked as though Musashi and Jōtarō, who was again by
his side, would be swallowed up by a sea of swords, but then an authoritative
voice cried, "Wait!"
       It was Kizaemon, who together with Debuchi and Murata was trying to
hold the crowd in check.
       "This man seems to have planned all this," said Kizaemon. "If you let him

entice you and you're wounded or killed, we shall have to answer to his lordship
for it. The dog was important, but not as important as a human life. The four of
us will assume all responsibility. Rest assured no harm will befall you because of
anything we do. Now calm down and go home."
        With some reluctance, the others dispersed, leaving the four men who had
entertained Musashi in the Shin'indō. It was no longer a case of guest and hosts,
but one of an outlaw facing his judges.
        "Musashi," said Kizaemon, "I'm sorry to tell you your plot has failed. I
suppose someone put you up to spying on Koyagyū Castle or just stirring up
trouble, but I'm afraid it didn't work."
        As they pressed in on Musashi, he was keenly aware that there was not one
among them who was not an expert with the sword. He stood quite still, his hand
on Jōtarō's shoulder. Surrounded, he couldn't have escaped even if he'd had
wings.
        "Musashi!" called Debuchi, working his sword a little way out of its
scabbard. "You've failed. The proper thing for you to do is commit suicide. You
may be a scoundrel, but you showed a great deal of bravery coming into this
castle with only that child at your side. We had a friendly evening together; now
we'll wait while you prepare yourself for hara-kiri. When you're ready, you can
prove that you're a real samurai!"
        That would have been the ideal solution; they had not consulted with
Sekishūsai, and if Musashi died now, the whole affair could be buried along with
his body.
        Musashi had other ideas. "You think I should kill myself? That's absurd! I
have no intention of dying, not for a long time." His shoulders shook with
laughter.
        "All right," said Debuchi. The tone was quiet, but the meaning was crystal
clear. "We've tried to treat you decently, but you've done nothing but take
advantage of us—"
      Kimura broke in, saying, "There's no need for further talk!"
      He went behind Musashi and pushed him. "Walk!" he commanded.
      "Walk where?"
      "To the cells."
      Musashi nodded and started walking, but in the direction of his own choice,
      straight toward the castle keep.
        "Where do you think you're going?" cried Kimura, jumping in front of
Musashi and stretching his arms out to block him. "This isn't the way to the cells.

They're in back of you. Turn around and get going!"
       "No!" cried Musashi. He looked down at Jōtarō, who was still clinging to
his side, and told him to go sit under a pine tree in the garden in front of the
keep. The ground around the pine trees was covered with carefully raked white
sand.
       Jōtarō darted from under Musashi's sleeve and hid behind the tree,
wondering all the while what Musashi intended to do next. The memory of his
teacher's bravery at Hannya Plain came back to him, and his body swelled with
excitement.
      Kizaemon and Debuchi took positions on either side of Musashi and tried to
      pull him back by the arms. Musashi didn't budge.
      "Let's go!"
      "I'm not going."
      "You intend to resist?"
      "I do!"
      Kimura lost patience and started to draw his sword, but his seniors,
      Kizaemon and Debuchi, ordered him to hold off.
      "What's the matter with you? Where do you think you're going?" "I intend
      to see Yagyū Sekishūsai."
       "You what?"
       Never had it crossed their minds that this insane youth could have even
thought of anything so preposterous.
       "And what would you do if you met him?" asked Kizaemon.
       "I'm a young man, I'm studying the martial arts, and it is one of my goals
in life to receive a lesson from the master of the Yagyū Style."
      "If that's what you wanted, why didn't you just ask?"
      "Isn't it true that Sekishūsai never sees anyone and never gives lessons to
      student warriors?"
      "Yes."
       "Then what else can I do but challenge him? I realize, of course, that even
if I do, he'll probably refuse to come out of retirement, so I'm challenging this
whole castle to a battle instead."
       "A battle?" chorused the four.
       His arms still held by Kizaemon and Debuchi, Musashi looked up at the
sky. There was a flapping sound, as an eagle flew toward them from the
blackness enveloping Mount Kasagi. Like a giant shroud, its silhouette hid the
stars from view before it glided noisily down to the roof of the rice storehouse.

       To the four retainers, the word "battle" sounded so melodramatic as to be
laughable, but to Musashi it barely sufficed to express his concept of what was to
come. He was not talking about a fencing match to be decided by technical skill
only. He meant total war, where the combatants concentrate every ounce of their
spirit and ability—and their fates are decided. A battle between two armies
might be different in form, but in essence it was the same. It was simple: a battle
between one man and one castle. His willpower was manifest in the firmness
with which his heels were now implanted in the ground. It was this iron
determination that made the word "battle" come naturally to his lips.
       The four men scrutinized his face, wondering again if he had an iota of
sanity left.
       Kimura took up the challenge. Kicking his straw sandals into the air and
tucking up his hakama, he said, "Fine! Nothing I like better than a battle! I can't
offer you rolling drums or clanging gongs, but I can offer you a fight. Shōda,
Debuchi, push him over here." Kimura had been the first to suggest that they
should punish Musashi, but he had held himself back, trying to be patient. Now
he had had his fill.
       "Go ahead!" he urged. "Leave him to me!"
       At exactly the same time, Kizaemon and Debuchi shoved Musashi
forward. He stumbled four or five paces toward Kimura. Kimura stepped back a
pace, lifted his elbow above his face, and sucking in his breath, swiftly brought
his sword down toward Musashi's stumbling form. There was a curious gritty
sound as the sword flashed through the air.
       At the same time a shout was heard—not from Musashi but from Jōtarō,
who had jumped out from his position behind the pine tree. The handful of sand
he had thrown was the source of the strange noise.
       Realizing that Kimura would be gauging the distance so as to strike
effectively, Musashi had deliberately added speed to his stumbling steps and at
the time of the strike was much closer to Kimura than the latter had anticipated.
His sword touched nothing but air, and sand.
       Both men quickly jumped back, separating themselves by three or four
paces. There they stood, staring menacingly at one another in the tension-filled
stillness.
       "This is going to be something to watch," said Kizaemon softly.
       Debuchi and Murata, though not within the sphere of battle, both took up
new positions and assumed defensive stances. From what they had seen so far,
they had no illusions about Musashi's competence as a fighter. His evasion and

recovery had already convinced them he was a match for Kimura.
       Kimura's sword was positioned slightly lower than his chest. He stood
motionless. Musashi, equally still, had his hand on the hilt of his sword, right
shoulder forward and elbow high. His eyes were two white, polished stones in
his shadowy face.
       For a time, it was a battle of nerves, but before either man moved, the
darkness around Kimura seemed to waver, to change indefinably. Soon it was
obvious that he was breathing faster and with greater agitation than Musashi.
       A low grunt, barely audible, issued from Debuchi. He knew now that what
had started as a comparatively trivial matter was about to turn into a catastrophe.
Kizaemon and Murata, he felt sure, understood this as well as he. It was not
going to be easy to put an end to this.
       The outcome of the fight between Musashi and Kimura was as good as
decided, unless extraordinary steps were taken. Reluctant as the three other men
were to do anything that suggested cowardice, they found themselves forced to
act to prevent disaster. The best solution would be to rid themselves of this
strange, unbalanced intruder as expeditiously as possible, without themselves
suffering needless wounds. No exchange of words was needed. They
communicated perfectly with their eyes.
       Acting in unison, the three moved in on Musashi. At the same instant,
Musashi's sword, with the twang of a bowstring, pierced the air, and a
thunderous shout filled the empty space. The battle cry came not from his mouth
alone but from his whole body, the sudden peal of a temple bell resounding in all
directions. From his opponents, arrayed to both sides of him, to front and back,
came a hissing gurgle.
       Musashi felt vibrantly alive. His blood seemed about to burst from every
pore. But his head was as cool as ice. Was this the flaming lotus of which the
Buddhists spoke? The ultimate heat made one with the ultimate cold, the
synthesis of flame and water?
       No more sand sailed through the air. Jōtarō had disappeared. Gusts of wind
whistled down from the peak of Mount Kasagi; tightly held swords glinted
luminescently.
       One against four, yet Musashi felt himself at no great disadvantage. He
was conscious of a swelling in his veins. At times like this, the idea of dying is
said to assert itself in the mind, but Musashi had no thought of death. At the
same time, he felt no certainty of his ability to win.
       The wind seemed to blow through his head, cooling his brain, clearing his

vision, though his body was growing sticky, and beads of oily sweat glistened on
his forehead.
       There was a faint rustle. Like a beetle's antennae, Musashi's sword told
him that the man on his left had moved his foot an inch or two. He made the
necessary adjustment in the position of his weapon, and the enemy, also
perceptive, made no further move to attack. The five formed a seemingly static
tableau.
       Musashi was aware that the longer this continued, the less advantageous it
was for him. He would have liked somehow to have his opponents not around
him but stretched out in a straight line—to take them on one by one—but he was
not dealing with amateurs. The fact was that until one of them shifted of his own
accord, Musashi could make no move. All he could do was wait and hope that
eventually one would make a momentary misstep and give him an opening.
       His adversaries took little comfort from their superiority in numbers. They
knew that at the slightest sign of a relaxed attitude on the part of any one of
them, Musashi would strike. Here, they understood, was the type of man that one
did not ordinarily encounter in this world.
       Even Kizaemon could make no move. "What a strange man!" he thought
to himself.
       Swords, men, earth, sky—everything seemed to have frozen solid. But
then into this stillness came a totally unexpected sound, the sound of a flute,
wafted by the wind.
       As the melody stole into Musashi's ears, he forgot himself, forgot the
enemy, forgot about life and death. Deep in the recesses of his mind, he knew
this sound, for it was the one that had enticed him out of hiding on Mount
Takateru—the sound that had delivered him into the hands of Takuan. It was
Otsū's flute, and it was Otsū playing it.
       He went limp inside. Externally, the change was barely perceptible, but
that was enough. With a battle cry rising from his loins, Kimura lunged forward,
his sword arm seeming to stretch out six or seven feet.
       Musashi's muscles tensed, and the blood seemed to rush through him
toward a state of hemorrhage. He was sure he had been cut. His left sleeve was
rent from shoulder to wrist, and the sudden exposure of his arm made him think
the flesh had been cut open.
       For once, his self-possession left him and he screamed out the name of the
god of war. He leaped, turned suddenly, and saw Kimura stumble toward the
place where he himself had been standing.

      "Musashi!" shouted Debuchi Magobei.
      "You talk better than you fight!" taunted Murata, as he and Kizaemon
scrambled to head Musashi off.
      But Musashi gave the earth a powerful kick and sprang high enough to
brush against the lower branches of the pine trees. Then he leaped again and
again, and off he flew into the darkness, never looking back.
     "Coward!"
     "Musashi!"
     "Fight like a man!"
      When Musashi reached the edge of the moat around the inner castle, there
was a cracking of twigs, and then silence. The only sound was the sweet melody
of the flute in the distance.
