Encounter and Retreat


       Along the stony path leading up to the Kiyomizudera Temple stood a row
of shabby houses, their planked roofs lined up like rotten teeth and so old that
moss covered their eaves. Under the hot noonday sun, the street reeked of salted
fish broiling over charcoal.
       A dish flew through the door of one of the ramshackle hovels and broke
into smithereens on the street. A man of about fifty, apparently an artisan of
sorts, came tumbling out after it. Close on his heels was his barefooted wife, her
hair a tangled mess and her tits hanging down like a cow's.
       "What're you saying, you lout?" she screamed shrilly. "You go off, leave
your wife and children to starve, then come crawling back like a worm!"
       From inside the house came the sound of children crying and nearby a dog
howled. She caught up with the man, seized him by his topknot and began
beating him.
       "Now where do you think you're going, you old fool?"
       Neighbors rushed up, trying to restore order.
       Musashi smiled ironically and turned back toward the ceramics shop. For
some time before the domestic battle erupted, he had been standing just outside
it, watching the potters with childlike fascination. The two men inside were
unaware of his presence. Eyes riveted on their work, they seemed to have
entered into the clay, become a part of it. Their concentration was complete.
       Musashi would have liked to have a try at working with the clay. Since
boyhood he had enjoyed doing things with his hands, and he thought he might at
least be able to make a simple tea bowl. Just then, however, one of the potters, an
old man of nearly sixty, started fashioning a tea bowl. Musashi, observing how
deftly he moved his fingers and handled his spatula, realized he'd overestimated
his own abilities. "It takes so much technique just to make a simple piece like
that," he marveled.
       These days he often felt deep admiration for other people's work. He found
he respected technique, art, even the ability to do a simple task well, particularly
if it was a skill he himself had not mastered.
       In one corner of the shop, on a makeshift counter made of an old door
panel, stood rows of plates, jars, sake cups, and pitchers. They were sold as

souvenirs, for the paltry sum of twenty or thirty pieces of cash, to people on their
way to and from the temple. In stark contrast to the earnestness the potters
devoted to their work was the humbleness of their boarded shack. Musashi
wondered whether they always had enough to eat. Life, it appeared, wasn't as
easy as it sometimes seemed.
       Contemplating the skill, concentration and devotion put into making
wares, even as cheap as these, made Musashi feel he still had a long way to go if
he was ever to reach the level of perfection in swordsmanship that he aspired to.
The thought was a sobering one, for in the past three weeks he'd visited other
well-known training centers in Kyoto besides the Yoshioka School and had
begun to wonder whether he had not been too critical of himself since his
confinement at Himeji. His expectation had been to find Kyoto full of men who
had mastered the martial arts. It was, after all, the imperial capital, as well as the
former seat of the Ashikaga shogunate, and it had long been a gathering place
for famous generals and legendary warriors. During his stay, however, he had
not found a single training center that had taught him anything to be genuinely
grateful for. Instead, at each school he had experienced disappointment. Though
he always won his bouts, he was unable to decide whether this was because he
was good or his opponents were bad. In either case, if the samurai he had met
were typical, the country was in sorry shape.
       Encouraged by his success, he had reached the point of taking a certain
pride in his expertise. But now, reminded of the danger of vanity, he felt
chastened. He mentally bowed in deep respect to the clay-smudged old men at
the wheel and started up the steep slope to Kiyomizudera.
       He had not gone far when a voice called to him from below. "You there,
sir. The rōnin!"
       "Do you mean me?" asked Musashi, turning around.
       Judging from the man's padded cotton garment, his bare legs, and the pole
he carried, he was a palanquin bearer by trade. From behind his beard, he said,
politely enough for one of his lowly status, "Sir, is your name Miyamoto?"
       "Yes."
       "Thank you." The man turned and went down toward Chawan Hill.
       Musashi watched him enter what appeared to be a teahouse. Passing
through the area a while earlier, he had noticed a large crowd of porters and
palanquin bearers standing about in a sunny spot. He couldn't imagine who had
sent one of them to ask his name but supposed that whoever it was would soon
come to meet him. He stood there awhile, but when no one appeared, resumed

his climb.
       He stopped along the way to look at several well-known temples, and at
each of them he bowed and said two prayers. One was: "Please protect my sister
from harm." The other was: "Please test the lowly Musashi with hardship. Let
him become the greatest swordsman in the land, or let him die."
       Arriving at the edge of a cliff, he dropped his basket hat on the ground and
sat down. From there he could look out over the whole city of Kyoto. As he sat
clasping his knees, a simple, but powerful, ambition welled up in his young
breast.
       "I want to lead an important life. I want to do it because I was born a
human being."
       He had once read that in the tenth century two rebels named Taira no
Masakado and Fujiwara no Sumitomo, both wildly ambitious, had gotten
together and decided that if they emerged from the wars victorious, they would
divide Japan up between them. The story was probably apocryphal to begin with,
but Musashi remembered thinking at the time how stupid and unrealistic it
would have been for them to believe they could carry out so grandiose a scheme.
Now, however, he no longer felt it laughable. While his own dream was of a
different sort, there were certain similarities. If the young cannot harbor great
dreams in their souls, who can? At the moment Musashi was imagining how he
could create a place of his own in the world.
       He thought of Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi, of their visions of
unifying Japan and of the many battles they had fought to that end. But it was
clear that the path to greatness no longer lay in winning battles. Today the people
wanted only the peace for which they'd thirsted so long. And as Musashi
considered the long, long struggle Tokugawa Ieyasu had had to endure to make
this desire a reality, he realized once again how hard it was to hold fast to one's
ideal.
       "This is a new age," he thought. "I have the rest of my life before me. I
came along too late to follow in the footsteps of Nobunaga or Hideyoshi, but I
can still dream of my own world to conquer. No one can stop me from doing
that. Even that palanquin bearer must have a dream of some sort."
       For a moment he put these ideas out of his mind and tried to view his
situation objectively. He had his sword, and the Way of the Sword was the way
he had chosen. It might be fine to be a Hideyoshi or an Ieyasu, but the times no
longer had use for people of their particular talents. Ieyasu had everything neatly
tied up; there was no more need for bloody wars. In Kyoto, stretched out below

him, life was no longer a touch-and-go affair.
        For Musashi, the important thing from now on would be his sword and the
society around him, his swordsmanship as it related to existing as a human
being. In a moment of insight, he was satisfied that he had found the link
between the martial arts and his own visions of greatness.
        As he sat lost in thought, the palanquin bearer's face came into view
beneath the cliff. He pointed his bamboo pole at Musashi and shouted, "There he
is, up there!"
        Musashi looked down to where the porters were milling about and
shouting. They began climbing the hill toward him. He got to his feet and, trying
to ignore them, walked farther up the hill, but soon discovered that his path was
blocked. Locking arms and thrusting out their poles, a sizable group of men had
encircled him at a distance. Looking over his shoulder, he saw that the men
behind him had come to a halt. One of them grinned, showing his teeth, and
informed the others that Musashi seemed to be "staring at a plaque or
something."
        Musashi, now before the steps of the Hongandō, was indeed gazing up at a
weather-beaten plaque hanging from the crossbeam of the temple entrance. He
felt ill at ease and wondered if he should try frightening them away with a battle
cry. Even though he knew he could make quick work of them, there was no point
in brawling with a bunch of lowly laborers. It was probably all a mistake
anyway. If so, they would disperse sooner or later. He stood there patiently,
reading and rereading the words on the plaque: "Original Vow." "Here she
comes!" one of the porters cried.
        They began talking among themselves in hushed tones. Musashi's
impression was that they were working themselves into a frenzy. The compound
within the western gate of the temple had quickly filled with people, and now
priests, pilgrims and vendors were straining their eyes to see what was going on.
Their faces brimming with curiosity, they formed circles outside the ring of
porters surrounding Musashi.
        From the direction of Sannen Hill came the rhythmical, pace-setting chants
of men carrying a load. The voices came closer and closer until two men entered
the temple grounds bearing on their backs an old woman and a rather tired-
looking country samurai.
        From her porter's back, Osugi waved her hand briskly and said, "This will
do." The bearer bent his legs, and as she jumped spryly to the ground, she
thanked him. Turning to Uncle Gon, she said, "We won't let him get away this

time, will we?" The two were clothed and shod as though they expected to spend
the rest of their lives traveling.
      "Where is he?" called Osugi.
      One of the bearers said, "Over there," and pointed proudly toward the
      temple.
      Uncle Gon moistened the handle of his sword with spittle, and the two
      pushed through the circle of people.
      "Take your time," cautioned one of the porters.
      "He looks pretty tough," said another.
      "Just make sure you're well prepared," advised still another.
      While the laborers offered words of encouragement and support to Osugi,
      the spectators looked on in dismay.
      "Is the old woman actually planning to challenge that rōnin to a duel?"
      "Looks that way."
       "But she's so old! Even her second is shaky on his legs! They must have
good reason to try taking on a man so much younger."
       "Must be a family feud of some kind!"
       "Look at that now, will you! She's lighting into the old man. Some of these
old grannies really have guts, don't they!"
       A porter ran up with a dipper of water for Osugi. After drinking a mouthful
she handed it to Uncle Gon and addressed him sternly. "Now see that you don't
get flustered, because there's nothing to be flustered about. Takezō's a man of
straw. Oh, he may have learned a little about using a sword, but he couldn't have
learned all that much. Just stay calm!"
       Taking the lead, she went straight to the front staircase of the Hongandō
and sat down on the steps, not ten paces from Musashi. Paying no attention
whatever either to him or to the crowd watching her, she took out her prayer
beads, and closing her eyes, began moving her lips. Inspired by her religious
fervor, Uncle Gon put his hands together and did likewise.
       The sight proved to be a little too melodramatic, and one of the spectators
started snickering. Immediately, one of the porters spun around and said
challengingly, "Who thinks this is funny? This is no laughing matter, you
imbecile! The old woman's come all the way from Mimasaka to find the good-
for-nothing who ran off with her son's bride. She's been praying at the temple
here every day for almost two months and today he finally showed up."
       "These samurai are different from the rest of us," was the opinion of
another porter. "At that age, the old woman could be living comfortably at home,

playing with her grandchildren, but no, here she is, in place of her son, seeking
to avenge an insult to her family. If nothing else, she deserves our respect."
       A third one said, "We're not supporting her just because she's been giving
us tips. She's got spirit, she has! Old as she is, she's not afraid to fight. I say we
should give her all the help we can. It's only right to help the underdog! If she
should lose, let's take care of the rōnin ourselves."
       "You're right! But let's do it now! We can't stand here and let her get
herself killed."
       As the crowd learned of the reasons for Osugi's being there, the excitement
mounted. Some of the spectators began goading the porters on.
       Osugi put her prayer beads back into her kimono, and a hush fell over the
temple grounds. "Takezō!" she called loudly, putting her left hand on the short
sword at her waist.
       Musashi had all the while been standing by in silence. Even when Osugi
called out his name, he acted as if he hadn't heard. Unnerved by this, Uncle Gon,
at Osugi's side, chose this moment to assume an attacking stance, and thrusting
his head forward, uttered a cry of challenge.
       Musashi again failed to respond. He couldn't. He simply did not know how
to. He recalled Takuan's having warned him in Himeji that he might run into
Osugi. He was prepared to ignore her completely, but he was very upset by the
talk the porters had been spreading among the mob. Furthermore, it was difficult
for him to restrain his resentment at the hatred the Hon'idens had harbored
against him all this time. The whole affair amounted to nothing more than a petty
matter of face and feelings in the little village of Miyamoto, a misunderstanding
that could be easily cleared up if only Matahachi were present.
       Nevertheless, he was at a loss as to what to do here and now. How was one
to respond to a challenge from a doddering old woman and a shrunken-faced
samurai? Musashi stared on in silence, his mind in a quandary.
      "Look at the bastard! He's afraid!" a porter shouted.
      "Be a man! Let the old woman kill you!" taunted another.
      There was not a soul who was not on Osugi's side.
       The old woman blinked her eyes and shook her head. Then she looked at
the bearers and snapped angrily, "Shut up! I just want you as witnesses. If the
two of us should happen to be killed, I want you to send our bodies back to
Miyamoto. Otherwise I don't need your talk, and I don't want your help!" Pulling
her short sword partway out of its scabbard, she took a couple of steps in
Musashi's direction.

       "Takezō!" she said again. "Takezō was always your name in the village, so
why don't you answer to it? I've heard you've taken a fine new name—Miyamoto
Musashi, is it?—but you'll always be Takezō to me! Ha, ha, ha!" Her wrinkled
neck quivered as she laughed. Evidently she hoped to kill Musashi with words
before swords were drawn.
       "Did you think you could keep me from tracking you down just by
changing your name? How stupid! The gods in heaven have guided me to you,
as I knew they would. Now fight! We'll see whether I take your head home with
me, or you manage somehow to stay alive!"
       Uncle Gon, in his withered voice, issued his own challenge. "It's been four
long years since you gave us the slip, and we've been searching for you all this
time. Now our prayers here at the Kiyomizudera have brought you into our
grasp. Old I may be, but I'm not going to lose to the likes of you! Prepare to
die!" Whipping out his sword, he cried to Osugi, "Get out of the way!"
      She turned on him furiously. "What do you mean, you old fool? You're the
      one who's shaking."
      "Never mind! The bodhisattvas of this temple will protect us!"
      "You're right, Uncle Gon. And the ancestors of the Hon'idens are with us
      too! There's nothing to fear."
      "Takezō! Come forward and fight!"
      "What are you waiting for?"
      Musashi did not move. He stood there like a deaf-mute, staring at the two
      old people and their drawn swords.
      Osugi cried, "What's the matter, Takezō! Are you scared?"
       She edged sideways, preparing to attack, but suddenly tripped on a rock
and pitched forward, landing on her hands and knees almost at Musashi's feet.
The crowd gasped, and someone screamed, "She'll be killed!"
       "Quick, save her!"
       But Uncle Gon only stared at Musashi's face, too stunned to move.
       The old woman then startled one and all by snatching up her sword and
walking back to Uncle Gon's side, where she again took a challenging stance.
"What's wrong, you lout?" Osugi cried. "Is that sword in your hand just an
ornament? Don't you know how to use it?"
      Musashi's face was like a mask, but he spoke at last, in a thunderous voice.
      "I can't do it!"
      He started walking toward them, and Uncle Gon and Osugi instantly fell
      back to either side.

      "Wh-where are you going, Takezō?"
      "I can't use my sword!"
      "Stop! Why don't you stop and fight?"
      "I told you! I can't use it!"
      He walked straight ahead, looking neither right nor left. He marched
      directly through the crowd, without once swerving.
      Recovering her senses, Osugi cried, "He's running away! Don't let him
      escape!"
       The crowd now moved in on Musashi, but when they thought they had him
hemmed in, they discovered he was no longer there. Their bewilderment was
acute. Eyes flared in surprise, then became dull patches in blank faces.
       Breaking up into smaller groups, they continued until sunset to run about,
searching frantically under the floors of the temple buildings and in the woods
for their vanished prey.
       Still later, as people were going back down the darkened slopes of Sannen
and Chawan hills, one man swore that he had seen Musashi jump with the
effortlessness of a cat to the top of the six-foot wall by the western gate and
disappear.
       Nobody believed this, least of all Osugi and Uncle Gon.
