Hannya Plain


       Jōtarō trudged along sadly behind his master, fearing each step was taking
them closer to certain death. A little earlier, on the damp, shady road near the
Tōdaiji, a dewdrop falling on his collar had almost made him cry out. The black
crows he saw along the way gave him an eerie feeling.
       Nara was far behind them. Through the rows of cryptomeria trees along
the road, they could make out the gently sloping plain leading up to Hannya Hill;
to their right were the rolling peaks of Mount Mikasa, above them the peaceful
sky.
       That he and Musashi were heading straight for the place where the Hōzōin
lancers were waiting in ambush made absolutely no sense to him. There were
plenty of places to hide, if one put one's mind to it. Why couldn't they go into
one of the many temples along the way and bide their time? That would surely
be more sensible.
       He wondered if perhaps Musashi meant to apologize to the priests, even
though he hadn't wronged them in any way. Jōtarō resolved that if Musashi
begged their forgiveness, he would too. This was no time to be arguing about the
right and wrong of things.
       "Jōtarō!"
       The boy started at the sound of his name being called. His eyebrows shot
up and his body became tense. Realizing his face was probably pale from fright
and not wanting to appear childish, he turned his eyes bravely toward the sky.
Musashi looked up at the sky too, and the boy felt more dispirited than ever.
       When Musashi continued, it was in his usual cheerful tone. "Feels good,
doesn't it, Jō? It's as though we were walking along on the songs of the
nightingales."
     "What?" asked the boy, astonished.
     "Nightingales, I said."
     "Oh, yeah, nightingales. There are some around here, aren't there?"
       Musashi could see from the paleness of the boy's lips that he was dejected.
He felt sorry for him. After all, in a matter of minutes he might be suddenly
alone in a strange place.
     "We're getting near Hannya Hill, aren't we?" said Musashi.

      "That's right."
      "Well, now what?"
       Jōtarō didn't reply. The singing of the nightingales fell coldly on his ears.
He couldn't shake off the foreboding that they might soon be parted forever. The
eyes that had bristled with mirth when surprising Musashi with the mask were
now worried and mournful.
       "I think I'd better leave you here," said Musashi. "If you come along, you
may get hurt accidentally. There's no reason to put yourself in harm's way."
       Jōtarō broke down, tears streaming down his cheeks as if a dam had
broken. The backs of his hands went up to his eyes and his shoulders quivered.
His crying was punctuated by tiny spasms, as if he had the hiccups.
       "What's this? Aren't you supposed to be learning the Way of the Samurai?
If I break and run, you run in the same direction. If I get killed, go back to the
sake shop in Kyoto. But for now, go to that little hill and watch from there.
You'll be able to keep an eye on everything that happens."
       Having wiped his tears away, Jōtarō grabbed Musashi's sleeves and blurted
out, "Let's run away!"
       "That's no way for a samurai to talk! That's what you want to be, isn't it?"
       "I'm afraid! I don't want to die!" With trembling hands, he kept trying to
pull Musashi back by the sleeve. "Think about me," he pleaded. "Please, let's get
away while we can!"
       "When you talk like that, you make me want to run too. You've got no
parents who'll look after you, just like me when I was your age. But—" "Then
come on. What are we waiting for?"
       "No!" Musashi turned, and planting his feet wide apart, faced the child
squarely. "I'm a samurai. You're a samurai's son. We're not going to run away."
       Hearing the finality in Musashi's tone, Jōtarō gave up and sat down, dirty
tears rolling off his face as he rubbed his red and swollen eyes with his hands.
       "Don't worry!" said Musashi. "I have no intention of losing. I'm going to
win! Everything will be all right then, don't you think?"
       Jōtarō took little comfort from this speech. He couldn't believe a word of
it. Knowing that the Hōzōin lancers numbered more than ten, he doubted
whether Musashi, considering his reputation for weakness, could beat them one
at a time, let alone all together.
       Musashi, for his part, was beginning to lose patience. He liked Jōtarō, felt
sorry for him, but this was no time to be thinking about children. The lancers
were there for one purpose: to kill him. He had to be prepared to face them.

Jōtarō was becoming a nuisance.
       His voice took on a sharp edge. "Stop your blubbering! You'll never be a
samurai, carrying on this way. Why don't you just go on back to the sake shop?"
Firmly and not too gently, he pushed the boy from him.
       Jōtarō, stung to the core, suddenly stopped crying and stood straight, a
surprised look on his face. He watched his master stride off toward Hannya Hill.
He wanted to call out after him, but resisted the urge. Instead he forced himself
to remain silent for several minutes. Then he squatted under a nearby tree, buried
his face in his hands, and gritted his teeth.
       Musashi did not look back, but Jōtarō's sobs echoed in his ears. He felt he
could see the hapless, frightened little boy through the back of his head and
regretted having brought him along. It was more than enough just to take care of
himself; still immature, with only his sword to rely on and no idea of what the
morrow might bring—what need had he of a companion?
       The trees thinned out. He found himself on an open plain, actually the
slightly rising skirt of the mountains in the distance. On the road branching off
toward Mount Mikasa, a man raised his hand in greeting.
       "Hey, Musashi! Where are you going?"
       Musashi recognized the man coming toward him; it was Yamazoe
Dampachi. Though Musashi sensed immediately that Dampachi's objective was
to lead him into a trap, he nevertheless greeted him heartily.
       Dampachi said, "Glad I ran into you. I want you to know how sorry I am
about that business the other day." His tone was too polite, and as he spoke, he
was obviously examining Musashi's face with great care. "I hope you'll forget
about it. It was all a mistake."
       Dampachi himself was none too sure what to make of Musashi. He had
been very impressed by what he had seen at the Hōzōin. Indeed, just thinking
about it sent chills up his spine. Be that as it may, Musashi was still only a
provincial rōnin, who couldn't be more than twenty-one or twenty-two years old,
and Dampachi was far from ready to admit to himself that anyone of that age
and status could be his better.
       "Where are you going?" he asked again.
       "I'm planning to go through Iga over to the Ise highroad. And you?" "Oh, I
have some things to do in Tsukigase."
      "That's not far from Yagyū Valley, is it?"
      "No, not far."
      "That's where Lord Yagyū's castle is, isn't it?"

       "Yes, it's near the temple called Kasagidera. You must go there sometime.
The old lord, Muneyoshi, lives in retirement, like a tea master, and his son,
Munenori, is in Edo, but you should still stop in and see what it's like."
       "I don't really think Lord Yagyū would give a lesson to a wanderer like
me."
       "He might. Of course, it'd help if you had an introduction. As it happens, I
know an armorer in Tsukigase who does work for the Yagyūs. If you'd like, I
could ask if he'd be willing to introduce you."
       The plain stretched out broadly for several miles, the skyline broken
occasionally by a lone cryptomeria or Chinese black pine. There were gentle
rises here and there, however, and the road rose and fell too. Near the bottom of
Hannya Hill, Musashi spotted the brown smoke of a fire rising beyond a low
hillock.
      "What's that?" he asked.
      "What's what?"
      "That smoke over there."
       "What's so strange about smoke?" Dampachi had been sticking close to
Musashi's left side, and as he stared into the latter's face, his own hardened
perceptibly.
       Musashi pointed. "That smoke over there: there's something suspicious
about it," he said. "Doesn't it look that way to you?"
       "Suspicious? In what way?"
       "Suspicious—you know, like the look on your face right now," Musashi
said sharply, abruptly sweeping his finger toward Dampachi.
       A sharp whistling sound broke the stillness on the plain. Dampachi gasped
as Musashi struck. His attention diverted by Musashi's finger, Dampachi never
realized that Musashi had drawn his sword. His body rose, flew forward, and
landed face down. Dampachi would not rise again.
       From the distance there was a cry of alarm, and two men appeared at the
top of the hillock. One of the men screamed, and both spun round and took to
their heels, their arms flailing the air wildly.
       The sword that Musashi was pointing toward the earth glittered in the
sunlight; fresh blood dripped from its tip. He marched directly on toward the
hillock, and although the spring breeze blew softly against his skin, Musashi felt
his muscles tauten as he ascended. From the top, he looked down at the fire
burning below.
       "He's come!" shouted one of the men who had fled to join the others.

There were about thirty men. Musashi picked out Dampachi's cohorts, Yasukawa
Yasubei and Otomo Banryū.
       "He's come!" parroted another.
       They'd been lolling in the sun. Now they all jumped to their feet. Half
were priests, the other half nondescript rōnin. When Musashi came into view, a
wordless but nonetheless savage stir went through the group. They saw the
bloodstained sword and suddenly realized that the battle had already begun.
Instead of challenging Musashi, they had been sitting around the fire and had let
him challenge them!
       Yasukawa and Otomo were talking as fast as they could, explaining with
broad rapid gestures how Yamazoe had been cut down. The rōnin scowled with
fury, the Hōzōin priests eyed Musashi menacingly while grouping themselves
for battle.
       All of the priests carried lances. Black sleeves tucked up, they were ready
for action, apparently set upon avenging the death of Agon and restoring the
temple's honor. They looked grotesque, like so many demons from hell.
       The rōnin formed a semicircle, so they could watch the show and at the
same time keep Musashi from escaping.
       This precaution, however, proved unnecessary, for Musashi showed no
sign of either running or backing down. In fact, he was walking steadily and
directly toward them. Slowly, pace by pace, he advanced, looking as if he might
pounce at any moment.
       For a moment, there was an ominous silence, as both sides contemplated
approaching death. Musashi's face went deadly white and through his eyes stared
the eyes of the god of vengeance, glittering with venom. He was selecting his
prey.
       Neither the rōnin nor the priests were as tense as Musashi. Their numbers
gave them confidence, and their optimism was unshakable. Still, no one wanted
to be the first attacked.
       A priest at the end of the column of lancers gave a signal, and without
breaking formation, they rushed around to Musashi's right.
       "Musashi! I am Inshun," shouted the same priest. "I'm told that you came
while I was away and killed Agon. That you later publicly insulted the honor of
the Hōzōin. That you mocked us by having posters put up all over town. Is this
true?"
       "No!" shouted Musashi. "If you're a priest, you should know better than to
trust only what you see and hear. You should consider things with your mind and

spirit."
       It was like pouring oil on the flames. Ignoring their leader, the priests
began to shout, saying talk was cheap, it was time to fight.
       They were enthusiastically seconded by the rōnin, who had grouped
themselves in close formation at Musashi's left. Screaming, cursing and waving
their swords in the air, they egged the priests on to action.
       Musashi, convinced that the rōnin were all mouth and no fight, suddenly
turned to them and shouted, "All right! Which one of you wants to come
forward?"
       All but two or three fell back a pace, each sure that Musashi's evil eye was
upon him. The two or three brave ones stood ready, swords outstretched, issuing
a challenge.
       In the wink of an eye, Musashi was on one of them like a fighting cock.
There was a sound like the popping of a cork, and the ground turned red. Then
came a chilling noise—not a battle cry, not a curse, but a truly bloodcurdling
howl.
       Musashi's sword screeched back and forth through the air, a reverberation
in his own body telling him when he connected with human bone. Blood and
brains spattered from his blade; fingers and arms flew through the air.
       The rōnin had come to watch the carnage, not to participate in it, but their
weakness had led Musashi to attack them first. At the very beginning, they held
together fairly well, because they thought the priests would soon come to their
rescue. But the priests stood silent and motionless as Musashi quickly
slaughtered five or six rōnin, throwing the others into confusion. Before long
they were slashing wildly in all directions, as often as not injuring one other.
       For most of the time, Musashi wasn't really conscious of what he was
doing. He was in a sort of trance, a murderous dream in which body and soul
were concentrated in his three-foot sword. Unconsciously, his whole life
experience—the knowledge his father had beaten into him, what he had learned
at Sekigahara, the theories he had heard at the various schools of
swordsmanship, the lessons taught him by the mountains and the trees—
everything came into play in the rapid movements of his body. He became a
disembodied whirlwind mowing down the herd of rōnin, who by their stunned
bewilderment left themselves wide open to his sword.
       For the short duration of the battle, one of the priests counted the number
of times he inhaled and exhaled. It was all over before he had taken his twentieth
breath.

      Musashi was drenched with the blood of his victims. The few remaining
rōnin were also covered with gore. The earth, the grass, even the air was bloody.
One of their number let out a scream, and the surviving rōnin scattered in all
directions.


       While all this was going on, Jōtarō was absorbed in prayer. His hands
folded before him and his eyes lifted skyward, he implored, "Oh, God in heaven,
come to his aid! My master, down there on the plain, is hopelessly outnumbered.
He's weak, but he isn't a bad man. Please help him!"
       Despite Musashi's instructions to go away, he couldn't leave. The place
where he had finally chosen to sit, his hat and his mask beside him, was a knoll
from which he could see the scene around the bonfire in the distance.
       "Hachiman! Kompira! God of Kasuga Shrine! Look! My master is
walking directly into the enemy. Oh, gods of heaven, protect him. He isn't
himself. He's usually mild and gentle, but he's been a little bit strange ever since
this morning. He must be crazy, or else he wouldn't take on that many at once!
Oh, please, please, help him!"
       After calling on the deities a hundred times or more, he noticed no visible
results of his efforts and started getting angry. Finally, he was shouting: "Aren't
there any gods in this land? Are you going to let the wicked people win, and the
good man be killed? If you do that, then everything they've always told me about
right and wrong is a lie! You can't let him be killed! If you do, I'll spit on you!"
       When he saw that Musashi was surrounded, his invocations turned to
curses, directed not only at the enemy but at the gods themselves. Then, realizing
that the blood being spilled on the plain was not his teacher's, he abruptly
changed his tune. "Look! My master's not a weakling after all! He's beating
them!"
       This was the first time Jōtarō had ever witnessed men fighting like beasts
to the death, the first time he had ever seen so much blood. He began to feel that
he was down there in the middle of it, himself smeared with gore. His heart
turned somersaults, he felt giddy and light-headed.
       "Look at him! I told you he could do it! What an attack! And look at those
silly priests, lined up like a bunch of cawing crows, afraid to take a step!"
       But this last was premature, for as he spoke the priests of the Hōzōin
began moving in on Musashi.
       "Oh, oh! This looks bad. They're all attacking him at once. Musashi's in

trouble!" Forgetting everything, out of his senses with anxiety, Jōtarō darted like
a fireball toward the scene of impending disaster.


       Abbot Inshun gave the command to charge, and in an instant, with a
tremendous roar of voices, the lancers flew into action. Their glittering weapons
whistled in the air as the priests scattered like bees sprung from a hive, shaved
heads making them appear all the more barbaric.
       The lances they carried were all different, with a wide variety of blades—
the usual pointed, cone-shaped ones, others flat, cross-shaped or hooked—each
priest using the type he favored most. Today they had a chance to see how the
techniques they honed in practice worked in real battle.
       As they fanned out, Musashi, expecting a trick attack, jumped back and
stood on guard. Weary and a little dazed from the earlier bout, he gripped his
sword handle tightly. It was sticky with gore, and a mixture of blood and sweat
clouded his vision, but he was determined to die magnificently, if die he must.
       To his amazement, the attack never came. Instead of making the
anticipated lunges in his direction, the priests fell like mad dogs on their
erstwhile allies, chasing down the rōnin who had fled and slashing at them
mercilessly as they screamed in protest. The unsuspecting rōnin, futilely trying
to direct the lancers toward Musashi, were slit, skewered, stabbed in the mouth,
sliced in two, and otherwise slaughtered until not one of them was left alive. The
massacre was as thorough as it was bloodthirsty.
       Musashi could not believe his eyes. Why had the priests attacked their
supporters? And why so viciously? He himself had only moments earlier been
fighting like a wild animal; now he could hardly bear to watch the ferocity with
which these men of the cloth slew the rōnin. Having been transformed for a time
into a mindless beast, he was now restored to his normal state by the sight of
others similarly transformed. The experience was sobering.
       Then he became aware of a tugging at his arms and legs. Looking down,
he found Jōtarō weeping tears of relief. For the first time, he relaxed.
       As the battle ended, the abbot approached him, and in a polite, dignified
manner, said, "You are Miyamoto, I assume. It is an honor to meet you." He was
tall and of light complexion. Musashi was somewhat overcome by his
appearance, as well as by his poise. With a certain amount of confusion, he
wiped his sword clean and sheathed it, but for the moment words failed him.
       "Let me introduce myself," continued the priest. "I am Inshun, abbot of the

Hōzōin."
       "So you are the master of the lance," said Musashi.
       "I'm sorry I was away when you visited us recently. I'm also embarrassed
that my disciple Agon put up such a poor fight."
       Sorry about Agon's performance? Musashi felt that perhaps his ears
needed cleaning. He remained silent for a moment, for before he could decide on
a suitable way to respond to Inshun's courteous tone, he had to straighten out the
confusion in his mind. He still couldn't figure out why the priests had turned on
the rōnin—could imagine no possible explanation. He was even somewhat
puzzled to find himself still alive.
       "Come," said the abbot, "and wash off some of that blood. You need a
rest." Inshun led him toward the fire, Jōtarō tagging along close behind.
       The priests had torn a large cotton cloth into strips and were wiping their
lances. Gradually they gathered by the fire, sitting down with Inshun and
Musashi as though nothing unusual had occurred. They began chatting among
themselves.
      "Look, up there," said one, pointing upward.
      "Ah, the crows have caught the whiff of blood. Cawing over the dead
      bodies, they are."
      "Why don't they dig in?"
      "They will, as soon as we leave. They'll be scrambling to get at the feast."
       The grisly banter went on in this leisurely vein. Musashi got the
impression that he wasn't going to find out anything unless he asked. He looked
at In-shun and said, "You know, I thought you and your men had come here to
attack me, and I'd made up my mind to take along as many of you as I could to
the land of the dead. I can't understand why you're treating me this way."
       Inshun laughed. "Well, we don't necessarily regard you as an ally, but our
real purpose today was to do a little housecleaning."
       "You call what's been going on housecleaning?"
       "That's right," said Inshun, pointing toward the horizon. "But I think we
might as well wait and let Nikkan explain it to you. I'm sure that speck on the
edge of the plain is he."
       At the same moment, on the other side of the plain, a horseman was saying
to Nikkan, "You walk fast for your age, don't you?"
      "I'm not fast. You're slow."
      "You're nimbler than the horses."
      "Why shouldn't I be? I'm a man."

       The old priest, who alone was on foot, was pacing the horsemen as they
advanced toward the smoke of the fire. The five riders with him were officials.
       As the party approached, the priests whispered among themselves, "It's the
Old Master." Having confirmed this, they fell back a good distance and lined
themselves up ceremoniously, as for a sacred rite, to greet Nikkan and his
entourage.
       The first thing Nikkan said was, "Did you take care of everything?"
       Inshun bowed and replied, "Just as you commanded." Then, turning to the
officials, "Thank you for coming."
       As the samurai jumped one by one off their horses, their leader replied,
"It's no trouble. Thank you for doing the real work! ... Let's get on with it, men."
       The officials went about inspecting the corpses and making a few notes;
then their leader returned to where Inshun was standing. "We'll send people from
the town to clean up the mess. Please feel free to leave everything as it is." With
that, the five of them remounted their horses and rode off.
       Nikkan let the priests know that they were no longer needed. Having
bowed to him, they started walking away silently. Inshun, too, said good-bye to
Nikkan and Musashi and took his leave.
       As soon as the men were gone, there was a great cacophony. The crows
descended, flapping their wings joyfully.
       Grumbling over the noise, Nikkan walked over to Musashi's side and said
casually, "Forgive me if I offended you the other day."
      "Not at all. You were very kind. It is I who should thank you." Musashi
      knelt and bowed deeply before the old priest.
      "Get off the ground," commanded Nikkan. "This field is no place for
      bowing."
      Musashi got to his feet.
       "Has the experience here taught you anything?" the priest asked. "I'm not
even sure what happened. Can you tell me?"
       "By all means," replied Nikkan. "Those officials who just left work under
Okubo Nagayasu, who was recently sent to administer Nara. They're new to the
district, and the rōnin have been taking advantage of their unfamiliarity with the
place—waylaying innocent passersby, blackmailing, gambling, making off with
the women, breaking into widows' houses—causing all sorts of trouble. The
administrator's office couldn't bring them under control, but they did know that
there were about fifteen ringleaders, including Dampachi and Yasukawa.
       "This Dampachi and his cohorts took a disliking to you, as you know.

Since they were afraid to attack you themselves, they concocted what they
thought was a clever plan, whereby the priests of the Hōzōin would do it for
them. The slanderous statements about the temple, attributed to you, were their
work; so were the posters. They made sure everything was reported to me,
presumably on the theory that I'm stupid."
      Musashi's eyes laughed as he listened.
      "I thought about it for a while," said the abbot, "and it occurred to me that
this was an ideal opportunity to have a housecleaning in Nara. I spoke to Inshun
about my plan, he agreed to undertake it, and now everybody's happy—the
priests, the administrators; also the crows. Ha, ha!"
      There was one other person who was supremely happy. Nikkan's story had
wiped away all of Jōtarō's doubts and fears, and the boy was ecstatic. He began
singing an improvised ditty while dancing about like a bird flapping its wings:


           A housecleaning, oh,
           A housecleaning!


      At the sound of his unaffected voice, Musashi and Nikkan turned to watch
him. He was wearing his mask with the curious smile and pointing his wooden
sword at the scattered bodies. Taking an occasional swipe at the birds, he
continued:


           Yes, you crows,
           Once in a while
           There's a need for housecleaning,
           But not only in Nara.
           It's nature's way
           To make everything new again.
           So spring can rise from the ground,
           We burn leaves,
           We burn fields.
           Sometimes we want snow to fall,
           Sometimes we want a housecleaning.
           Oh, you crows!

           Feast away! What a spread!
           Soup straight from the eye sockets,
           And thick red sake.
           But don't have too much
           Or you'll surely get drunk.


     "Come here, boy!" shouted Nikkan sharply.
     "Yes, sir." Jōtarō stood still and turned to face the abbot.
     "Stop acting the fool. Fetch me some rocks."
     "This kind?" asked Jōtarō, snatching a stone that lay near his feet and
     holding it up.
     "Yes, like that. Bring lots of them!"
     "Yes, sir!"
      As the boy gathered the stones, Nikkan sat down and wrote on each one
"Namu Myōhō Renge-kyō," the sacred invocation of the Nichiren sect. Then he
gave them back to the boy and ordered him to scatter them among the dead.
While Jōtarō did this, Nikkan put his palms together and chanted a section of the
Lotus Sutra.
      When he had finished, he announced, "That should take care of them. Now
you two can be on your way. I shall return to Nara." As abruptly as he had come,
he departed, walking at his customary breakneck speed, before Musashi had a
chance to thank him or make arrangements to see him again.
      For a moment, Musashi just stared at the retreating figure, then suddenly
he darted off to catch up with it. "Reverend priest!" he called. "Haven't you
forgotten something?" He patted his sword as he said this.
      "What?" asked Nikkan.
      "You have given me no word of guidance, and since there is no way of
knowing when we'll meet again, I'd appreciate some small bit of advice."
      The abbot's toothless mouth let out its familiar crackling laugh. "Don't you
understand yet?" he asked. "That you're too strong is the only thing I have to
teach you. If you continue to pride yourself on your strength, you won't live to
see thirty. Why, you might easily have been killed today. Think about that, and
decide how to conduct yourself in the future."
      Musashi was silent.
      "You accomplished something today, but it was not well done, not by a
long shot. Since you're still young, I can't really blame you, but it's a grave error

to think the Way of the Samurai consists of nothing but a show of strength.
       "But then, I tend to have the same fault, so I'm not really qualified to speak
to you on the subject. You should study the way that Yagyū Sekishūsai and Lord
Kōizumi of Ise have lived. Sekishūsai was my teacher, Lord Kōizumi was his. If
you take them as your models and try to follow the path they have followed, you
may come to know the truth."
       When Nikkan's voice ceased, Musashi, who had been staring at the
ground, deep in thought, looked up. The old priest had already vanished.
