The Wheel of Fortune


      It was a day of unforgettable shame for the Yoshioka School. Never before
had this prestigious center of the martial arts suffered such total humiliation.
      Ardent disciples sat around in abject despair, long faces and whitened
knuckles mirroring their distress and frustration. One large group was in the
wood-floored anteroom, smaller groups in the side rooms. It was already
twilight, when ordinarily they would have been heading home, or out to drink.
No one made a move to leave. The funereal silence was broken only by the
occasional clatter of the front gate.
      "Is that him?"
      "Is the Young Master back?"
      "No, not yet." This from a man who had spent half the afternoon leaning
disconsolately against a column at the entranceway.
      Each time this happened, the men sank deeper into their morass of gloom.
Tongues clicked in dismay and eyes shone with pathetic tears.
      The doctor, coming out of a back room, said to the man at the
entranceway, "I understand Seijūrō isn't here. Don't you know where he is?"
      "No. Men are out looking for him. He'll probably be back soon." The
doctor harrumphed and departed.
      In front of the school, the candle on the altar of the Hachiman Shrine was
surrounded by a sinister corona.
      No one would have denied that the founder and first master, Yoshioka
Kemp& was a far greater man than Seijūrō or his younger brother. Kempō had
started life as a mere tradesman, a dyer of cloth, but in the course of endlessly
repeating the rhythms and movements of paste-resist dyeing, he had conceived
of a new way of handling the short sword. After learning the use of the halberd
from one of the most skillful of the warrior-priests at Kurama and then studying
the Kyō hachi style of swordsmanship, he had then created a style completely his
own. His short-sword technique had subsequently been adopted by the Ashikaga
shōguns, who summoned him to be an official tutor. Kempō had been a great
master, a man whose wisdom was equal to his skill.
      Although his sons, Seijūrō and Denshichirō, had received training as
rigorous as their father's, they had fallen heir to his considerable wealth and

fame, and that, in the opinion of some, was the cause of their weakness. Seijūrō
was customarily addressed as "Young Master," but he had not really attained the
level of skill that would attract a large following. Students came to the school
because under Kempō the Yoshioka style of fighting had become so famous that
just gaining entrance meant being recognized by society as a skilled warrior.
       After the fall of the Ashikaga shogunate three decades earlier, the House of
Yoshioka had ceased to receive an official allowance, but during the lifetime of
the frugal Kemp& it had gradually accumulated a great deal of wealth. In
addition, it had this large establishment on Shijō Avenue, with more students
than any other school in Kyoto, which was by far the largest city in the country.
But in truth, the school's position at the top level in the world of swordsmanship
was a matter of appearances only.
       The world outside these great white walls had changed more than most of
the people inside realized. For years they had boasted, loafed, and played
around, and time had, as it will, passed them by. Today their eyes had been
opened by their disgraceful loss to an unknown country swordsman.
       A little before noon, one of the servants came to the dōjō and reported that
a man who called himself Musashi was at the door, requesting admittance.
Asked what sort of a fellow he was, the servant replied that he was a rōnin, that
he hailed from Miyamoto in Mimasaka, was twenty-one or twenty-two years
old, about six feet tall, and seemed rather dull. His hair, uncombed for at least a
year, was carelessly tied up behind in a reddish mop, and his clothing was too
filthy to tell whether it was black or brown, plain or figured. The servant, while
admitting that he might be mistaken, thought he detected an odor about the man.
He did have on his back one of the webbed leather sacks people called warriors'
study bags, and this did probably mean he was a shugyōsha, one of those
samurai, so numerous these days, who wandered about devoting their every
waking hour to the study of swordsmanship. Nevertheless, the servant's overall
impression was that this Musashi was distinctly out of place at the Yoshioka
School.
       If the man had simply been asking for a meal, there would have been no
problem. But when the group heard that the rustic intruder had come to the great
gate to challenge the famous Yoshioka Seijūrō to a bout, they burst into
uproarious laughter. Some argued for turning him away without further ado,
while others said they should first find out what style he employed and the name
of his teacher.
       The servant, as amused as anyone else, left and came back to report that

the visitor had, as a boy, learned the use of the truncheon from his father and had
later on picked up what he could from warriors passing through the village. He
left home when he was seventeen and "for reasons of his own" spent his
eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth years immersed in scholarly studies. All the
previous year he had been alone in the mountains, with the trees and the
mountain spirits as his only teachers. Consequently, he couldn't lay claim to any
particular style or teacher. But in the future he hoped to learn the teachings of
Kiichi Hōgen, master the essence of the Kyōhachi Style, and emulate the great
Yoshioka Kempō by creating a style of his own, which he had already decided to
call the Miyamoto Style. Despite his many flaws, this was the goal toward which
he proposed to work with all his heart and soul.
       It was an honest and unaffected answer, the servant conceded, but the man
had a country accent and stammered at almost every word. The servant
obligingly provided his listeners with an imitation, again throwing them into
gales of laughter.
       The man must be out of his senses. To proclaim that his goal was to create
a style of his own was sheer madness. By way of enlightening the lout, the
students sent the servant out again, this time to ask whether the visitor had
appointed anyone to take his corpse away after the bout.
       To this Musashi replied, "If by any chance I should be killed, it makes no
difference whether you discard my body on Toribe Mountain or throw it into the
Kamo River with the garbage. Either way, I promise not to hold it against you."
       His way of answering this time, said the servant, was very clear, with
nothing of the clumsiness of his earlier replies.
       After a moment's hesitation, someone said, "Let him in!"
       That was how it started, with the disciples thinking they would cut the
newcomer up a bit, then throw him out. In the very first bout, however, it was the
school's champion who came away the loser. His arm was broken clean through.
Only a bit of skin kept his wrist attached to his forearm.
       One by one others accepted the stranger's challenge, and one by one they
went down in ignominious defeat. Several were wounded seriously, and
Musashi's wooden sword dripped with blood. After about the third loss, the
disciples' mood turned murderous; if it took every last one of them, they would
not let this barbaric madman get away alive, taking the honor of the Yoshioka
School with him.
       Musashi himself ended the bloodshed. Since his challenge had been
accepted, he had no qualms about the casualties, but he announced, "There's no

point in continuing until Seijūrō returns," and refused to fight anymore. There
being no alternative, he was shown, at his own request, to a room where he could
wait. Only then did one man come to his senses and call for the doctor.
       It was soon after the doctor left that voices screaming out the names of two
of the wounded brought a dozen men to the back room. They clustered around
the two samurai in stunned disbelief, their faces ashen and their breathing
uneven. Both were dead.
       Footsteps hurried through the dōjō and into the death room. The students
made way for Seijūrō and Tōji. Both were as pale as though they'd just emerged
from an icy waterfall.
       "What's going on here?" demanded Tōji. "What's the meaning of all this?"
His tone was surly, as usual.
       A samurai kneeling grim-faced by the pillow of one of his dead
companions fixed accusing eyes on Tōji and said, "You should explain what's
going on. You're the one who takes the Young Master out carousing. Well, this
time you've gone too far!"
       "Watch your tongue, or I'll cut it out!"
       "When Master Kempō was alive, a day never passed when he wasn't in the
dōjō!"
       "What of it? The Young Master wanted a little cheering up, so we went to
the Kabuki. What do you mean, talking that way in front of him? Just who do
you think you are?"
       "Does he have to stay out all night to see the Kabuki? Master Kempō must
be turning in his grave."
       "That's enough!" cried Tōji, lunging toward the man.
       As others moved in and tried to separate and calm down the two, a voice
heavy with pain rose slightly above the sound of the scuffle. "If the Young
Master's back, it's time to stop squabbling. It's up to him to retrieve the honor of
the school. That rōnin can't leave here alive."
       Several of the wounded screamed and pounded on the floor. Their
agitation was an eloquent rebuke to those who had not faced Musashi's sword.
       To the samurai of this age, the most important thing in the world was
honor. As a class, they virtually competed with each other to see who would be
the first to die for it. The government had until recently been too busy with its
wars to work out an adequate administrative system for a country at peace, and
even Kyoto was governed only by a set of loose, makeshift regulations. Still, the
emphasis of the warrior class on personal honor was respected by farmers and

townsmen alike, and it played a role in preserving peace. A general consensus
regarding what constituted honorable behavior, and what did not, made it
possible for the people to govern themselves even with inadequate laws.
       The men of the Yoshioka School, though uncultured, were by no means
shameless degenerates. When after the initial shock of defeat they returned to
their normal selves, the first thing they thought of was honor. The honor of their
school, the honor of the master, their own personal honor.
       Putting aside individual animosities, a large group gathered around Seijūrō
to discuss what was to be done. Unfortunately, on this of all days, Seijūrō felt
bereft of fighting spirit. At the moment when he should have been at his best, he
was hung over, weak and exhausted.
       "Where is the man?" he asked, as he hitched up his kimono sleeves with a
leather thong.
       "He's in the small room next to the reception room," said one student,
pointing across the garden.
       "Call him!" Seijūrō commanded. His mouth was dry from tension. He sat
down in the master's place, a small raised platform, and prepared himself to
receive Musashi's greeting. Choosing one of the wooden swords proffered by his
disciples, he held it upright beside him.
       Three or four men acknowledged the command and started to leave, but
Tōji and Ryōhei told them to wait.
       There ensued a good deal of whispering, just out of Seijūrō's earshot. The
muted consultations centered around Tōji and other of the school's senior
disciples. Before long family members and a few retainers joined in, and there
were so many heads present that the gathering split into groups. Though heated,
the controversy was settled in a relatively short time.
       The majority, not only concerned about the school's fate but uncomfortably
aware of Seijūrō's shortcomings as a fighter, concluded that it would be unwise
to let him face Musashi man to man, then and there. With two dead and several
wounded, if Seijūrō were to lose, the crisis facing the school would become
extraordinarily grave. It was too great a risk to take.
       The unspoken opinion of most of the men was that if Denshichirō were
present, there would be little cause for alarm. In general, it was thought that he
would have been better suited than Seijūrō to carry on his father's work, but
being the second son and having no serious responsibilities, he was an
exceedingly easygoing type. That morning he had left the house with friends to
go to Ise and hadn't even bothered to say when he'd return.

        Tōji approached Seijūrō and said, "We've reached a conclusion."
        As Seijūrō listened to the whispered report, his face grew more and more
indignant, until finally he gasped with barely controlled fury, "Trick him?"
        Tōji tried to silence him with his eyes, but Seijūrō was not to be silenced.
"I can't agree to anything like that! It's cowardly. What if word got out that the
Yoshioka School was so afraid of an unknown warrior that it hid and ambushed
him?"
        "Calm down," Tōji pleaded, but Sequa continued to protest. Drowning him
out, Tōji said loudly, "Leave it to us. We'll take care of it."
        But Seijūrō would have none of it. "Do you think that I, Yoshioka Seijūrō,
would lose to this Musashi, or whatever his name is?"
        "Oh, no, it's not that at all," lied Tōji. "It's just that we don't see how you
would gain any honor by defeating him. You're of much too high a status to take
on a brazen vagabond like that. Anyway, there's no reason why anybody outside
this house should know anything about it, is there? Only one thing is important
—not to let him get away alive."
        Even while they argued, the number of men in the hall shrank by more
than half. As quietly as cats, they were disappearing into the garden, toward the
back door and into the inner rooms, fading almost imperceptibly into the
darkness.
        "Young Master, we can't put it off any longer," Tōji said firmly, and blew
out the lamp. He loosened his sword in its scabbard and raised his kimono
sleeves.
        Seijūrō remained seated. Though to some extent relieved at not having to
fight the stranger, he was by no means happy. The implication, as he saw it, was
that his disciples had a low opinion of his ability. He thought back on how he
had neglected practice since his father's death, and the thought made him
despondent.
        The house grew as cold and quiet as the bottom of a well. Unable to sit
still, Seijūrō got up and stood by the window. Through the paper-covered doors
of the room given Musashi, he could see the softly flickering light of the lamp.
That was the only light anywhere.
        Quite a number of other eyes were peering in the same direction. The
attackers, their swords on the ground in front of them, held their breath and
listened intently for any sound that might tell them what Musashi was up to.
        Tōji, whatever his shortcomings, had experienced the training of a
samurai. He was trying desperately to figure out what Musashi might do. "He's

completely unknown in the capital, but he's a great fighter. Could he just be
sitting silently in that room? Our approach has been quiet enough, but with this
many people pressing in on him, he must have noticed. Anyone trying to make it
through life as a warrior would notice; otherwise he'd be dead by now.
        "Mm, maybe he's dozed off. It rather looks that way. After all, he's been
waiting a long time.
        "On the other hand, he's already proved he's clever. He's probably standing
there fully prepared for battle, leaving the lamp lit to put us off guard, just
waiting for the first man to attack.
        "That must be it. That is it!"
        The men were edgily cautious, for the target of their murderous intent
would be just as eager to slay them. They exchanged glances, silently asking
who would be the first to run forward and risk his life.
        Finally the wily Tōji, who was just outside Musashi's room, called out,
"Musashi! Sorry to have kept you waiting! Could I see you for a moment?"
        There being no answer, Tōji concluded that Musashi was indeed ready and
waiting for the attack. Vowing not to let him escape, Tōji signaled to right and
left, then aimed a kick at the shoji. Dislodged from its groove by the blow, the
bottom of the door slid about two feet into the room. At the sound, the men who
were supposed to storm into the room unintentionally fell back a pace. But in a
matter of seconds, someone shouted for the attack, and all the other doors of the
room clattered open.
        "He's not here!"
        "The room's empty!"
        Voices full of restored courage muttered disbelievingly. Musashi had been
sitting there just a short while ago, when someone had brought him the lamp.
The lamp still burned, the cushion he had been sitting on was still there, the
brazier still had a good fire in it, and there was a cup of untouched tea. But no
Musashi!
        One man ran out on the veranda and let the others know that he had gotten
away. From under the veranda and from dark spots in the garden, students and
retainers assembled, stamping the ground angrily and cursing the men who had
been standing guard on the small room. The guards, however, insisted that
Musashi could not have gotten away. He had walked down to the toilet less than
an hour earlier but had returned to the room immediately. There was no way he
could have gotten out without being seen.
        "Are you saying he's invisible, like the wind?" one man asked scornfully.

Just then a man who had been poking around in a closet shouted, "Here's how he
got away! See, these floorboards have been ripped up."
       "It hasn't been very long since the lamp was trimmed. He can't have gone
far!"
       "After him!'
       If Musashi had indeed fled, he must at heart be a coward! The thought
fired his pursuers with the fighting spirit that had been so notably lacking a bit
earlier. They were streaming out the front, back and side gates when someone
yelled, "There he is!"
       Near the back gate, a figure shot out of the shadows, crossed the street and
entered a dark alley on the other side. Running like a hare, it swerved off to one
side when it reached the wall at the end of the alley. Two or three of the students
caught up with the man on the road between the Kūyadō and the burned ruins of
the Honnōji.
      "Coward!"
      "Run away, will you?"
      "After what you did today?"
       There was the sound of heavy scuffling and kicking, and a defiant howl.
The captured man had regained his strength and was turning on his captors. In an
instant, the three men who had been dragging him by the back of his neck
plummeted to the ground. The man's sword was about to descend on them when
a fourth man ran up and shouted, "Wait! It's a mistake! He's not the one we're
after."
      Matahachi lowered his sword and the men got to their feet.
      "Hey, you're right! That's not Musashi."
      As they were standing there looking perplexed, Tōji arrived on the scene.
      "Did you catch him?" he asked.
      "Uh, wrong man—not the one who caused all the trouble."
      Tōji took a closer look at the captive and said with astonishment, "Is that
      the man you were chasing?"
      "Yes. You know him?'
      "I saw him just today at the Yomogi Teahouse."
      While they eyed Matahachi silently and suspiciously, he calmly
      straightened his tousled hair and brushed off his kimono.
      "Is he the master of the Yomogi?"
      "No, the mistress of the place told me he wasn't. He seems to be just a
      hanger-on of some sort."

       "He looks shady, all right. What was he doing around the gate? Spying?"
        But Tōji had already started to move on. "If we waste time with him, we'll
lose Musashi. Split up and get moving. If nothing else, we can at least find out
where he's staying."
        There was a murmur of assent and they were off.
        Matahachi, facing the moat of the Honnōji, stood silently with his head
bowed while the men ran by. As the last one passed, he called out to him. The
man stopped. "What do you want?" he asked.
       Going toward him, Matahachi asked, "How old was this man called
       Musashi?"
       "How would I know?"
       "Would you say he was about my age?"
       "I guess that's about right. Yes."
       "Is he from the village of Miyamoto in Mimasaka Province?"
       "Yes."
       "I guess 'Musashi' is another way of reading the two characters used to
       write 'Takezō,' isn't it?"
       "Why are you asking all these questions? Is he a friend of yours?" "Oh, no.
       I was just wondering."
        "Well, in the future, why don't you just stay away from places where you
don't belong? Otherwise you might find yourself in some real trouble one of
these days." With that warning, the man ran off.
        Matahachi started walking slowly beside the dark moat, stopping
occasionally to look up at the stars. He didn't seem to have any particular
destination.
        "It is him after all!" he decided. "He must have changed his name to
Musashi and become a swordsman. I guess he must be pretty different from the
way he used to be." He slid his hands into his obi and began kicking a stone
along with the toe of his sandal. Every time he kicked, he seemed to see Takezō's
face before him.
        "It's not the right time," he mumbled. "I'd be ashamed for him to see me
the way I am now. I've got enough pride not to want him to look down on me. . .
. If that Yoshioka bunch catches up with him, though, they're likely to kill him.
Wonder where he is. I'd like to at least warn him."
