The Drying Pole


      "A guy with a monkey? Yes, he came by a while ago."
      "Did you notice which way he went?"
      "That way, toward Nōjin Bridge. Didn't cross it, though—looked like he
      went into the swordsmith's shop down there."
       After conferring briefly, the Yoshioka students stormed off, leaving their
informant gaping in wonder at what the fuss was all about.
       Although it was just past closing time for the shops along the East Moat,
the sword shop was still open. One of the men went in, consulted with the
apprentice and emerged shouting, "Temma! He's headed toward Temma!" And
away they raced.
       The apprentice had said that just as he was about to hang the shutters for
the night, a samurai with a long forelock had thrown a monkey down near the
front door, seated himself on a stool and asked to see the master. Told he was
out, the samurai had said that he wanted to have his sword sharpened, but that it
was much too valuable to entrust to anyone but the master himself. He had also
insisted on seeing samples of the swordsmith's work.
       The apprentice had politely shown him some blades, but the samurai, after
looking them over, showed nothing but disgust. "It seems all you handle here are
ordinary weapons," he said dryly. "I don't think I'd better give you mine. It's
much too good, the work of a Bizen master. It's called the Drying Pole. See? It's
perfect." He had then held it up with obvious pride.
       The apprentice, amused by the young man's boasting, mumbled that the
only remarkable features of the sword seemed to be its length and its
straightness. The samurai, apparently offended, abruptly stood up and asked
directions to the Temma-Kyoto ferry landing.
       "I'll have my sword taken care of in Kyoto," he snapped. "All the Osaka
swordsmiths I've visited seem to deal only in junk for ordinary foot soldiers.
Sorry to have bothered you." With a cold look in his eye, he had departed.
       The apprentice's story infuriated them all the more, as fresh evidence of
what they already considered to be the young man's excessive conceit. It was
clear to them that cutting off Gion Tōji's topknot had made the braggart cockier
than ever.

       "That's our man for sure!"
       "We've got him now. He's as good as caught."
       The men continued their pursuit, not once stopping to rest, even when the
sun began to set. Nearing the dock at Temma, someone exclaimed, "We've
missed it," referring to the last boat of the day.
       "That's impossible."
       "What makes you think we've missed it?" another asked.
       "Can't you see? Down there," said the first man, pointing to the wharf.
"The teashops are piling up their stools. The boat must've already pulled out."
       For a moment they all stood stock-still, the wind gone from their sails.
Then, on making inquiries, they found that the samurai had indeed boarded the
last boat. They also learned it had just left and wouldn't be docking at the next
stop, Toyosaki, for some time. The boats going upstream toward Kyoto were
slow; they would have plenty of time to catch it at Toyosaki without even
hurrying.
       Knowing this, they took their time over tea, rice cakes and some cheap
sweets before setting off at a brisk pace up the road along the riverbank. Ahead
the river looked like a silver snake winding away into the distance. The Nakatsu
and Temma rivers joined to form the Yodo, and near this fork a light flickered
midstream.
       "It's the ship!" one man shouted.
       The seven became animated and soon forgot the piercing cold. In the bare
fields by the road, dry rushes covered with frost glittered like slender steel
swords. The wind seemed laden with ice.
       As the distance between themselves and the floating light narrowed, they
were able to see the boat quite clearly. Soon one of the men, without thinking,
shouted, "Hey, there. Slow down!"
       "Why?" came a response from on board.
       Annoyed at having attention drawn to themselves, his companions chided
the loudmouth. The boat was stopping at the next landing anyway; it was sheer
stupidity to give advance warning. Now that they had, however, everyone agreed
that the best thing to do would be to make their demand for the passenger then
and there.
       "There's only one of him, and if we don't challenge him outright, he may
get suspicious, jump overboard and escape."
       Keeping pace with the boat, they again called out to those on board. An
authoritative voice, undoubtedly the captain's, demanded to know what they

wanted.
      "Bring the boat to the bank!"
      "What! Are you crazy?" came the reply, accompanied by raucous laughter.
      "Land here!"
      "Not on your life."
       "Then we'll be waiting for you at the next landing. We have some business
with a young man you've got on board. Wears a forelock and has a monkey. Tell
him if he has any sense of honor, he'll show himself. And if you let him get
away, we'll drag every one of you ashore."
       "Captain, don't answer them!" pleaded a passenger.
       "Whatever they say, just ignore it," counseled another. "Let's go on to
Moriguchi. There are guards there."
       Most of the passengers were huddled in fear and talking in subdued tones.
The one who had spoken so jauntily to the samurai on shore a few minutes
earlier now stood mute. For him as well as the others, safety lay in keeping some
distance between the boat and the riverbank.
       The seven men, sleeves hitched up and hands on their swords, stayed with
the boat. Once they stopped and listened, apparently expecting an answer to their
challenge, but heard none.
      "Are you deaf?" one of them shouted. "We told you to tell that young
      braggart to come to the rail!"
      "Do you mean me?" bellowed a voice from the boat.
      "He's there, all right, and brazen as ever!"
       While the men pointed their fingers and squinted toward the boat, the
murmuring of the passengers grew frenzied. To them it looked as though the
men on the shore might at any moment leap onto the deck.
       The young man with the long sword stood firmly poised on the gunwale,
his teeth shining like white pearls in the reflected moonlight. "There's no one
else on board with a monkey, so I suppose it's me you're looking for. Who are
you, freebooters down on your luck? A troupe of hungry actors?"
       "You still don't know who you're talking to, do you, Monkey Man? Watch
your tongue when you address men from the House of Yoshioka!"
       As the shouting match intensified, the boat neared the dike at Kema, which
had both mooring posts and a shed. The seven ran forward to seal off the
landing, but no sooner reached it than the boat stopped mid-river and began
turning around in circles.
      The Yoshioka men grew livid.

      "What do you think you're doing?"'
      "You can't stay out there forever!"
      "Come in or we'll come out after you."
       The threats continued unabated till the prow of the boat began to move
toward the bank. A voice roared through the cold air: "Shut up, you fools! We're
coming in! Better get ready to defend yourselves."
       Despite the other passengers' pleas, the young man had seized the
boatman's pole and was bringing the ferry in. The seven samurai immediately
assembled around where the prow would touch shore and watched the figure
poling the boat grow larger as he neared them. But then suddenly the boat's
speed picked up, and he was upon them before they knew it. As the hull scraped
bottom, they fell back, and a dark, round object came sailing across the reeds
and locked itself around one man's neck. Before realizing it was only the
monkey, they had all instinctively drawn their swords and sliced through the
empty air around them. To disguise their embarrassment, they shouted impatient
orders at one another.
       Hoping to stay out of the fray, the passengers huddled in a corner of the
boat. The mayhem among the seven on the bank was encouraging, if somewhat
puzzling, but no one yet dared to speak. Then, in an instant, all heads turned with
a gasp as the boat's self-appointed pilot rammed his pole into the riverbed and
vaulted, more lightly than the monkey, over the rushes to shore.
       This caused even greater confusion, and without pausing to regroup, the
Yoshioka men scampered toward their enemy in single file. This couldn't have
put him in a better position to defend himself.
       The first man had already advanced too far to turn back when he realized
the stupidity of his move. At that moment every martial skill he'd ever learned
deserted him. It was all he could do to bare his teeth and wave his sword
erratically in front of him.
       The handsome young man, aware of his psychological advantage, seemed
to grow in stature. His right hand was behind him, on his sword hilt, and his
elbow protruded above his shoulder.
       "So you're from the Yoshioka School, are you? That's good. I feel as if I
know you already. One of your men was kind enough to allow me to remove his
topknot. Apparently that wasn't enough for you. Have you all come for a
haircut? If you have, I'm sure I can oblige you. I'm having this blade sharpened
soon anyway, so I don't mind putting it to good use."
       As the declaration ended, the Drying Pole split first the air and then the

cringing body of the nearest swordsman.
       Seeing their comrade slain so easily paralyzed their brains; one by one
they backed into one another in retreat, like so many colliding balls. Taking
advantage of their obvious disorganization, the attacker swung his sword
sideways at the next man, delivering a blow so solid it sent him tumbling with a
shriek into the rushes.
       The young man glared at the remaining five, who had in the meantime
arranged themselves around him like flower petals. Reassuring each other that
their present tactic was foolproof, they regained their confidence to the point of
taunting the young man again. But this time their words had a tremulous, hollow
ring.
       Finally, with a loud battle cry, one of the men sprang forward and swung.
He was sure he had made a cut. In fact, his sword point fell short of its target by
two full feet and finished its arc by clanging loudly against a rock. The man fell
forward, leaving himself wide open.
       Rather than slay such easy prey, the young man leaped sideways and
swung at the next man over. While the death scream still rang through the air, the
other three took to their heels.
       The young man, looking murderous, stood holding his sword with both
hands. "Cowards!" he shouted. "Come back and fight! Is this the Yoshioka Style
you boast of? To challenge a person and then run away? No wonder the House of
Yoshioka's become a laughingstock."
       To any self-respecting samurai, such insults were worse than being spat
on, but the young man's former pursuers were too busy running to care.
       Just then, from the vicinity of the dike, the sound of a horse's bells rang
out. The river and the frost in the fields reflected enough light for the young man
to make out a form on horseback and another running along behind. Though
frosty breath steamed from their nostrils, they seemed oblivious of the cold as
they sped along. The three fleeing samurai nearly collided with the horse as his
rider brutally reined him up short.
       Recognizing the three, Seijūrō scowled furiously. "What are you doing
here?" he barked. "Where are you running to?"
       "It's ... it's the Young Master!" one of them stammered.
       Ueda Ryōhei, appearing from behind the horse, lit into them. "What's the
meaning of this? You're supposed to be escorting the Young Master, you pack of
fools! I suppose you were too busy getting yourselves into another drunken
brawl."

       The three, rattled but righteously indignant, spilled out the story of how,
far from being in a drunken fight, they had been defending the honor of the
Yoshioka School and its master and how they had come to grief at the hands of a
young but demonic samurai.
       "Look!" cried one of them. "He's coming this way."
       Terrified eyes watched the approaching enemy.
       "Quiet down!" Ryōhei ordered in a disgusted voice. "You talk too much.
Fine ones you are to protect the honor of the school. We'll never be able to live
down that performance. Stand aside! I'll take care of him myself." He took a
challenging stance and waited.
       The young man rushed toward them. "Stand and fight!" he was shouting.
"Is running away the Yoshioka version of the Art of War? I personally don't want
to kill you, but my Drying Pole's still thirsty. The least you can do, cowards that
you are, is leave your heads behind." He was running along the dike with
enormous, confident strides and seemed likely to leap right over the head of
Ryōhei, who spat on his hands and regripped his sword with resolution.
       At the moment the young man flew by, Ryōhei uttered a piercing cry,
raised his sword over the young man's gold-colored coat, brought it down
fiercely, and missed.
       Halting instantly, the young man turned around, crying, "What's this? A
new one?"
       As Ryōhei stumbled forward with the momentum of his swing, the young
man swiped viciously at him. In all his life, Ryōhei had never seen such a
powerful stroke, and although he managed to dodge it just in time, he plunged
headfirst into the paddy field below. Luckily for him, the dike was fairly low and
the field frozen over, but he lost his weapon as well as his confidence when he
fell.
       When he clambered back up, the young man was moving with the strength
and speed of an enraged tiger, scattering the three disciples with a flash of his
sword and making for Seijūrō.
       Seijūrō hadn't yet felt any fear. He had thought it would be all over before
he himself became involved. But now danger was rushing directly at him, in the
form of a rapacious sword.
       Moved by a sudden inspiration, Seijūrō cried, "Ganryū! Wait!" He
disengaged one foot from its stirrup, put it on the saddle, and stood straight up.
As the horse sprang forward over the young man's head, Seijūrō flew backward
through the air and landed on his feet about three paces away.

       "What a feat!" cried the young man in genuine admiration as he moved in
on Seijūrō. "Even if you are my enemy, that was really magnificent! You must be
Seijūrō himself. On guard!"
       The blade of the long sword became the embodiment of the young man's
fighting spirit. It loomed ever closer to Seijūrō, but Seijūrō, for all his failings,
was Kempō's son, and he was able to face the danger calmly.
       Addressing the young man confidently, he said, "You're Sasaki Kojirō
from Iwakuni. I can tell. It is true, as you surmise, that I am Yoshioka Seijūrō.
However, I have no desire to fight you. If it's really necessary, we can have it out
some other time. Right now I'd just like to find out how all this came about. Put
your sword away."
       When Seijūrō had called him Ganryū, the young man had apparently not
heard; now, being addressed as Sasaki Kojirō startled him. "How did you know
who I am?" he asked.
       Seijūrō slapped his thigh. "I knew it! I was only guessing, but I was right!"
Then he came forward and said, "It's a pleasure to meet you. I've heard a good
deal about you."
      "Who from?" asked Kojirō.
      "From your senior, Itō Yagorō."
      "Oh, are you a friend of his?"
       "Yes. Until last fall, he had a hermitage on Kagura Hill in Shirakawa, and I
often visited him there. He came to my house a number of times too."
       Kojirō smiled. "Well, then, this is not exactly like meeting for the first
time, is it?"
       "No. Ittōsai mentioned you rather often. He said there was a man from
Iwakuni named Sasaki who had learned the style of Toda Seigen and then
studied under Kanemaki Jisai. He told me this Sasaki was the youngest man in
Jisai's school but would one day be the only swordsman who could challenge
Ittōsai."
       "I still don't see how you knew so quickly."
       "Well, you're young and you fit the description. Seeing you wield that long
sword reminded me that you're also called Ganryū—'The Willow on the
Riverbank.' I had a feeling it must be you, and I was right."
       "That's amazing. It really is."
       As Kojirō chuckled with delight, his eyes dropped to his bloody sword,
which reminded him that there had been a fight and made him wonder how they
would straighten everything out. As it happened, however, he and Seijūrō hit it

off so well that an understanding was soon reached, and after a few minutes they
were walking along the dike shoulder to shoulder, like old friends. Behind them
were Ryōhei and the three dejected disciples. The little group headed toward
Kyoto.
       Kojirō was saying, "From the beginning, I couldn't see what the fight was
all about. I had nothing against them."
       Seijūrō's thoughts were on Gion Tōji's recent conduct. "I'm disgusted with
Tōji," he said. "When I get back, I'll call him to account. Please don't think I
have any grudge against you. I'm simply mortified to find that the men in my
school aren't better disciplined."
       "Well, you can see what sort of man I am," Kojirō replied. "I talk too big
and I'm always ready to fight anybody. Your disciples weren't the only ones to
blame. In fact, I think you should give them some credit for trying to defend
your school's good name. It's unfortunate they're not much as fighters, but at
least they tried. I feel a little sorry for them."
      "I'm the one to blame," Seijūrō said simply. The expression on his face was
      one of genuine pain.
      "Let's just forget the whole thing."
      "Nothing would please me more."
       The sight of the two making up came as a relief to the others. Who would
have thought this handsome, overgrown boy was the great Sasaki Kojirō, whose
praises Ittōsai had sung? ("The prodigy of Iwakuni" were his actual words.) No
wonder Tōji, in his ignorance, had been tempted to do some teasing. And no
wonder he had ended up looking ridiculous.
       It made Ryōhei and the other three shiver to think how close they had
come to being mowed down by the Drying Pole. Now that their eyes had been
opened, the sight of Kojirō's broad shoulders and sturdy back made them wonder
how they could have been so stupid as to underestimate him in the first place.
       After a time, they came again to the landing. The corpses were already
frozen, and the three were assigned to bury them, while Ryōhei went to find the
horse. Kojirō went about whistling for his monkey, which suddenly appeared out
of nowhere and jumped on his master's shoulder.
       Seijūrō not only urged Kojirō to come along to the school on Shijō Avenue
and stay awhile but even proffered his horse. Kojirō refused.
       That wouldn't be right," he said, with unaccustomed deference. "I'm just a
young rōnin, and you're the master of a great school, the son of a distinguished
man, the leader of hundreds of followers." Taking hold of the bridle, he

continued, "Please, you ride. I'll just hold on to this. It's easier to walk that way.
If it's really all right for me to go with you, I'd like to accept your offer and stay
with you in Kyoto for a time."
        Seijūrō, with equal cordiality, said, "Well, then, I'll ride for now, and when
your feet get tired, we can change places."
        Seijūrō, faced with the certain prospect of having to fight Miyamoto
Musashi at the beginning of the New Year, was reflecting that it was not a bad
idea to have a swordsman like Sasaki Kojirō around.
