The Announcement


       Seijūrō arrived back at the school in a foul mood. He thrust the falcon into
a disciple's hands, curtly ordering him to put the bird back in its cage.
       "Isn't Kojirō with you?" asked the disciple.
       "No, but I'm sure he'll be along presently."
       After changing his clothes, Seijūrō went and sat down in the room where
guests were received. Across the court was the great dōjō, closed since the final
practice on the twenty-fifth. Throughout the year, there was the coming and
going of a thousand or so students; now the dōjō would not be open again until
the first training session of the New Year. With the wooden swords silent, the
house seemed coldly desolate.
       Desperate to have Kojirō as a sparring partner, Seijūrō inquired of the
disciple repeatedly whether he had returned. But Kojirō did not come back,
neither that evening nor the following day.
       Other callers came in force, however, it being the last day of the year, the
day to settle up all accounts. For those in business, it was a question of collecting
now or waiting until the Bon festival of the following summer, and by noon the
front room was full of bill collectors. Normally these men wore an air of
complete subservience in the presence of samurai, but now, their patience
exhausted, they were making their feelings known in no uncertain terms.
       "Can't you pay at least part of what you owe?"
       "You've been saying the man in charge is out, or the master is away, for
months now. Do you think you can keep putting us off forever?"
       "How many times do we have to come here?"
       "The old master was a good customer. I wouldn't say a word if it were only
the last half year, but you didn't pay at midyear either. Why, I've even got unpaid
bills from last year!"
       A couple of them impatiently tapped on their account books and stuck
them under the nose of the disciple. There were carpenters, plasterers, the rice
man, the sake dealer, clothiers and sundry suppliers of everyday goods. Swelling
their ranks were the proprietors of various teahouses where Seijūrō ate and drank
on credit. And these were the small fry, whose bills could hardly be compared to
those of the usurers from whom Denshichirō, unknown to his brother, had

borrowed cash.
       Half a dozen of these men sat down and refused to budge.
       "We want to talk with Master Seijūrō himself. It's a waste of time to talk to
disciples."
       Seijūrō kept to himself in the back of the house, his only words being:
"Tell them I'm out." And Denshichirō, of course, would not have come near the
house on a day like this. The face most conspicuously absent was that of the man
in charge of the school's books and the household accounts: Gion Tōji. Several
days earlier, he had decamped with Okō and all the money he'd collected on his
trip west.
       Presently six or seven men swaggered in, led by Ueda Ryōhei, who even in
such humiliating circumstances was swollen with pride at being one of the Ten
Swordsmen of the House of Yoshioka. With a menacing look, he asked, "What's
going on here?"
       The disciple, while contriving to make it plain that he considered no
explanation necessary, gave a brief rundown of the situation.
       "Is that all?" Ryōhei said scornfully. "Just a bunch of moneygrubbers?
What difference does it make as long as the bills are eventually paid? Tell the
ones who don't want to wait for payment to step into the practice hall; I'll discuss
it with them in my own language."
       In the face of this threat, the bill collectors grew sulky. Owing to Yoshioka
Kempō's uprightness in money matters, not to mention his position as a military
instructor to the Ashikaga shōguns, they had bowed before the Yoshioka
household, groveled, lent them goods, lent them anything, come whenever
summoned, left when they were told, and said yes to anything and everything.
But there was a limit to how long they could kowtow to these vain warriors. The
day they allowed themselves to be intimidated by threats like Ryōhei's was the
day the merchant class would go out of business. And without them, what would
the samurai do? Did they imagine for a moment they could run things by
themselves?
       As they stood around grumbling, Ryōhei made it perfectly clear that he
regarded them as so much dirt. "All right now, go on home! Hanging around
here won't do you any good."
      The merchants grew silent but made no move to leave.
      "Throw them out!" cried Ryōhei.
      "Sir, this is an outrage!"
      "What's outrageous about it?" asked Ryōhei.

      "It's completely irresponsible!"
      "Who says it's irresponsible?"
       "But it is irresponsible to throw us out!"
       "Then why don't you leave quietly? We're busy."
       "If it wasn't the last day of the year, we wouldn't be here begging. We need
the money you owe to settle our own debts before the day is out."
      "That's too bad. Too bad. Now go!"
      "This is no way to treat us!"
      "I think I've heard enough of your complaints!" Ryōhei's voice grew angry
      again.
      "No one would complain—if you'd just pay up!"
      "Come here!" commanded Ryōhei.
      "Wh-who?"
      "Anyone who's dissatisfied."
      "This is crazy!"
      "Who said that?"
       "I wasn't referring to you, sir. I was talking about this ... this situation."
"Shut up!" Ryōhei seized the man by his hair and threw him out the side door.
       "Anybody else with complaints?" growled Ryōhei. "We're not going to
have you riffraff inside the house claiming paltry sums of money. I won't permit
it! Even if the Young Master wants to pay you, I won't let him do it."
       At the sight of Ryōhei's fist, the bill collectors stumbled all over each other
in their rush to get out of the gate. But once outside, their vilification of the
House of Yoshioka intensified.
      "Will I ever laugh and clap my hands when I see the 'For Sale' sign posted
      on this place! It shouldn't be long now."
      "They say it won't be."
      "How could it be?"
       Ryōhei, vastly amused, held his stomach with laughter as he went to the
back of the house. The other disciples went with him to the room where Seijūrō
was bent, alone and silent, over the brazier.
       "Young Master," said Ryōhei, "you're so quiet. Is something wrong?"
       "Oh, no," replied Seijūrō, somewhat cheered by the sight of his most
trusted followers. "The day's not far off now, is it?" he said.
       "No," agreed Ryōhei. "That's what we came to see you about. Shouldn't we
decide on the time and place and let Musashi know?"
       "Why, yes, I suppose so," said Seijūrō pensively. "The place ... Where

would be a good place? How about the field at the Rendaiji, north of the city?"
"That sounds all right. What about the time?"
       "Should it be before the New Year's decorations are taken down, or after?"
"The sooner the better. We don't want to give that coward time to worm his way
out."
      "How about the eighth?"
      "Isn't the eighth the anniversary of Master Kempō's death?"
      "Ah, so it is. In that case, how about the ninth? At seven o'clock in the
      morning? That'll do, won't it?"
      "All right. We'll post a sign on the bridge this evening."
      "Fine."
      "Are you ready?" asked Ryōhei.
       "I've been ready all along," replied Seijūrō, who was in no position to
answer otherwise. He had not really considered the possibility of losing to
Musashi. Having studied under his father's tutelage since childhood, and having
never lost a match to anyone in the school, not even to the oldest and best-
trained disciples, he couldn't imagine being beaten by this young, inexperienced
country bumpkin.
       His confidence, nonetheless, was not absolute. He felt a tinge of
uncertainty, and characteristically, instead of attributing this to his failure to put
into practice the Way of the Samurai, wrote it off as being due to recent personal
difficulties. One of these, perhaps the greatest, was Akemi. He'd been ill at ease
ever since the incident at Sumiyoshi, and when Gion Tōji had absconded, he had
learned that the financial cancer in the Yoshioka household had already reached
a critical stage.
      Ryōhei and the others came back with the message to Musashi written on a
      freshly cut board.
      "Is this what you had in mind?" asked Ryōhei.
      The characters, still glistening wet, said:


       Answer—In response to your request for a bout, I name the following time
and place. Place: Field of the Rendaiji. Time: Seven o'clock in the morning,
ninth day of the first month. I swear on my sacred oath to be present.
       If, by some chance, you do not fulfill your promise, I shall consider it my
right to ridicule you in public.
       If I break this agreement, may the punishment of the gods be visited upon

me! Seijūrō, Yoshioka Kempō II, of Kyoto. Done on the last day of [1605].
     To the Rōnin of Mimasaka, Miyamoto Musashi.


       After reading it, Seijūrō said, "It's all right." The announcement made him
feel more relaxed, perhaps because for the first time it came home to him that the
die was cast.
       At sunset, Ryōhei put the sign under his arm and strode proudly along the
street with a couple of other men to post it on the Great Bridge at Gojō Avenue.


       At the foot of Yoshida Hill, the man to whom the announcement was
addressed was walking through a neighborhood of samurai of noble lineage and
small means. Conservatively inclined, they led ordinary lives and were unlikely
to be found doing anything that would excite comment.
       Musashi was going from gate to gate examining the nameplates.
Eventually he came to a stop in the middle of the street, seemingly unwilling or
unable to look further. He was searching for his aunt, his mother's sister and his
only living relative besides Ogin.
       His aunt's husband was a samurai serving, for a small stipend, the House
of Konoe. Musashi thought it would be easy to find the house near Yoshida Hill
but soon discovered there was very little to distinguish one house from another.
Most were small, surrounded by trees, and their gates were shut tight as clams.
Quite a few of the gates had no nameplates.
       His uncertainty about the place he was seeking made him reluctant to ask
directions. "They must have moved," he thought. "I may as well stop looking."
       He turned back toward the center of town, which lay under a mist
reflecting the lights of the year-end marketplace. Although it was New Year's
Eve, the streets in the downtown area still hummed with activity.
       Musashi turned to look at a woman who had just passed going the other
way. He hadn't seen his aunt for at least seven or eight years, but he was sure this
was she, for the woman resembled the image he had formed of his mother. He
followed her a short distance, then called out to her.
       She stared at him suspiciously for a moment or two, intense surprise
reflected in eyes wrinkled by years of humdrum living on a tiny budget. "You're
Musashi, Munisai's son, aren't you?" she finally asked.
       He wondered why she called him Musashi rather than Takezō, but what

actually disturbed him was the impression that he was not welcome. "Yes," he
replied, "I'm Takezō, from the House of Shimmen."
       She looked him over thoroughly, without the customary "oh"s and "ah"s as
to how large he had grown or how different he looked from before. "Why have
you come here?" she asked coolly in a rather censorious tone.
       "I had no special purpose in coming. I just happened to be in Kyoto. I
thought it would be nice to see you." Looking at the eyes and hairline of his
aunt, he thought of his mother. If she were still alive, surely she would be about
as tall as this woman and speak with the same sort of voice.
       "You came to see me?" she asked incredulously.
       "Yes. I'm sorry it's so sudden."
       His aunt waved her hand before her face in a gesture of dismissal. "Well,
you've seen me, so there's no reason to go any farther. Please leave!"
       Abashed at this chilly reception, he blurted out, "Why do you say that as
soon as you see me? If you want me to leave, I'll go, but I can't see why. Have I
done something you disapprove of? If so, at least tell me what it is."
       His aunt seemed unwilling to be pinned down. "Oh, as long as you're here,
why don't you come to our house and say hello to your uncle? But you know
what kind of person he is, so don't be disappointed at anything he might say. I'm
your aunt, and since you've come to see us, I don't want you to go away with
hard feelings."
       Taking what little comfort he could from this, Musashi walked with her to
her house and waited in the front room while she broke the news to her husband.
Through the shoji he could hear the asthmatic, grumbling voice of his uncle,
whose name was Matsuo Kaname.
       "What?" asked Kaname testily. "Munisai's son here? ... I was afraid he'd
show up sooner or later. You mean he's here, in this house? You let him in
without asking me?"
       Enough was enough, but when Musashi called to his aunt to say good-bye,
Kaname said, "You're in there, are you?" and slid the door open. His face wore
not a frown but an expression of utter contempt—the look city people reserve for
their unwashed country relatives. It was as though a cow had lumbered in and
planted its hooves on the tatami.
      "Why did you come here?" asked Kaname.
      "I happened to be in town. I thought I'd just ask after your health." "That's
      not true!"
      "Sir?"

       "You can lie all you want, but I know what you've done. You caused a lot
of trouble in Mimasaka, made a lot of people hate you, disgraced your family's
name and then ran away. Isn't that the truth?"
       Musashi was nonplussed.
       "How can you be so shameless as to come to call on relatives?"
       "I'm sorry for what I did," said Musashi. "But I fully intend to make the
proper amends to my ancestors and to the village."
       "I suppose you can't go back home, of course. Well, we reap what we sow.
Munisai must be weeping in his grave!"
       "I've stayed too long," said Musashi. "I must be going now."
       "Oh, no you don't!" said Kaname angrily. "You stay right here! If you go
wandering around this neighborhood, you'll get yourself in trouble in no time.
That cantankerous old woman from the Hon'iden family showed up here about a
half year ago. Recently she's been around several times. She keeps asking us
whether you've been here and trying to find out from us where you are. She's
after you, all right—with a terrible vengeance."
       "Oh, Osugi. Has she been here?"
       "Indeed she has. I heard all about you from her. If you weren't a relative of
mine, I'd tie you up and hand you over to her, but under the circumstances ...
Anyway, you stay here for now. It'll be best to leave in the middle of the night,
so there won't be any trouble for your aunt and me."
       That his aunt and uncle had swallowed every word of Osugi's slander was
mortifying. Feeling terribly alone, Musashi sat in silence, staring at the floor.
Eventually his aunt took pity on him and told him to go to another room and get
some sleep.
       Musashi flopped down on the floor and loosened his scabbards. Once
again came the feeling that he had no one in the world to depend on but himself.
       He reflected that perhaps his uncle and aunt were dealing with him frankly
and sternly precisely because of the blood relationship. While he had been angry
enough earlier to want to spit on the doorway and leave, he now took a more
charitable view, reminding himself that it was important to give them the benefit
of every doubt.
       He was too naive to accurately judge the people around him. If he had
already become rich and famous, his sentiments about relatives would have been
appropriate, but here he was barging in out of the cold in a dirty rag of a kimono
on New Year's Eve, of all times. Under the circumstances, his aunt and uncle's
lack of familial affection was not surprising.

       This was soon brought forcefully home to Musashi. He had lain down
hungry on the guileless assumption that he would be offered something to eat.
Though he smelled food cooking and heard the rattle of pots and pans in the
kitchen, no one came near his room, where the flicker of the fire in the brazier
was no larger than that of a firefly. He presently concluded that hunger and cold
were secondary; what was most important now was to get some sleep, which he
proceeded to do.
       He awoke about four hours later to the sound of temple bells ringing out
the old year. The sleep had done him good. Jumping to his feet, he felt that his
fatigue had been washed away. His mind was fresh and clear.
       In and around the city, huge bells bonged in slow and stately rhythm,
marking the end of darkness and the beginning of light. One hundred and eight
peals for the one hundred and eight illusions of life—each ring a call to men and
women to reflect on the vanity of their ways.
       Musashi wondered how many people there were who on this night could
say: "I was right. I did what I should have done. I have no regrets." For him,
each resounding knell evoked a tremor of remorse. He could conjure up nothing
but the things he had done wrong during the last year. Nor was it only the last
year—the year before, and the year before that, all the years that had gone by
had brought regrets. There had not been a single year devoid of them. Indeed,
there had hardly been one day.
       From his limited perspective of the world, it seemed that whatever people
did they soon came to regret. Men, for example, took wives with the intention of
living out their lives with them but often changed their minds later. One could
readily forgive women for their afterthoughts, but then women rarely voiced
their complaints, whereas men frequently did so. How many times had he heard
men disparage their wives as if they were old discarded sandals?
       Musashi had no marital problems, to be sure, but he had been the victim of
delusion, and remorse was not a feeling alien to him. At this very moment, he
was very sorry he had come to his aunt's house. "Even now," he lamented, "I'm
not free of my sense of dependence. I keep telling myself I must stand on my
own two feet and fend for myself. Then I suddenly fall back on someone else.
It's shallow! It's stupid!
       "I know what I should do!" he thought. "I should make a resolution and
write it down."
       He undid his shugyōsha's pack and took out a notebook made of pieces of
paper folded in quarters and tied together with coiled paper strips. He used this

to jot down thoughts that occurred to him during his wanderings, along with Zen
expressions, notes on geography, admonitions to himself and, occasionally, crude
sketches of interesting things he saw. Opening the notebook in front of him, he
took up his brush and stared at the white sheet of paper.
       Musashi wrote: "I will have no regrets about anything."
       While he often wrote down resolutions, he found that merely writing them
did little good. He had to repeat them to himself every morning and every
evening, as one would sacred scripture. Consequently, he always tried to choose
words that were easy to remember and recite, like poems.
       He looked for a time at what he had written, then changed it to read: "I will
have no regrets about my actions."
       He mumbled the words to himself but still found them unsatisfactory. He
changed them again: "I will do nothing that I will regret."
       Satisfied with this third effort, he put his brush down. Although the three
sentences had been written with the same intent, the first two could conceivably
mean he would have no regrets whether he acted rightly or wrongly, whereas the
third emphasized his determination to act in such a way as to make self-reproach
unnecessary.
       Musashi repeated the resolution to himself, realizing it was an ideal he
could not achieve unless he disciplined his heart and his mind to the utmost of
his ability. Nevertheless, to strive for a state in which nothing he did would cause
regrets was the path he must pursue. "Someday I will reach that state!" he
vowed, driving the oath like a stake deep into his own heart.
       The shoji behind him slid open, and his aunt looked in. With a voice
shivering around the roots of her teeth, she said, "I knew it! Something told me I
shouldn't let you stay here, and now what I was afraid would happen is
happening. Osugi came knocking at the door, and saw your sandals in the
entrance hall. She's convinced you're here and insists we bring you to her!
Listen! You can hear her from here. Oh, Musashi, do something!"
       "Osugi? Here?" said Musashi, reluctant to believe his ears. But there was
no mistake. He could hear her hoarse voice seeping through the cracks like an
icy wind, addressing Kaname in her stiffest, haughtiest manner.
       Osugi had arrived just as the pealing of the midnight bells had ended and
Musashi's aunt was on the point of going to draw fresh water for the New Year.
Troubled by the thought of her New Year being ruined by the unclean sight of
blood, she made no attempt to hide her annoyance.
       "Run away as fast as you can," she implored. "Your uncle's holding her off

by insisting you haven't been here. Slip out now while there's still time." She
picked up his hat and pack and led him to the back door, where she had placed a
pair of her husband's leather socks, along with some straw sandals.
       While tying the sandals, Musashi said sheepishly, "I hate to be a nuisance,
but won't you give me a bowl of gruel? I haven't had a thing to eat this evening."
       "This is no time for eating! But here, take these. And be off with you!" She
held out five rice cakes on a piece of white paper.
       Eagerly accepting them, Musashi held them up to his forehead in a gesture
of thanks. "Good-bye," he said.
       On his way down the icy lane, on the first day of the joyous New Year,
Musashi walked sadly—a winter bird with feathers molted, flying off into a
black sky. His hair and fingernails felt frozen. All he could see was his own
white breath, quickly turning to frost on the fine hairs around his mouth. "It's
cold!" he said out loud. Surely the Eight Freezing Hells could not be this
numbing! Why, when he normally shrugged off the cold, did he feel it so bitterly
this morning?
       He answered his own question. "It's not just my body. I'm cold inside. Not
disciplined properly. That's what it is. I still long to cling to warm flesh, like a
baby, and I give in too quickly to sentimentality. Because I'm alone, I feel sorry
for myself and envy people who have nice warm houses. At heart, I'm base and
mean! Why can't I be thankful for independence and freedom to go where I
choose? Why can't I hold on to my ideals and my pride?"
       As he savored the advantages of freedom, his aching feet grew warm,
down to the tips of his toes, and his breath turned to steam. "A wanderer with no
ideal, no sense of gratitude for his independence, is no more than a beggar! The
difference between a beggar and the great wandering priest Saigyō lies inside the
heart!"
       He suddenly became aware of a white sparkle under his feet. He was
treading on brittle ice. Without noticing, he had walked all the way to the frozen
edge of the Kamo River. Both it and the sky were still black, and there was as
yet no hint of dawn in the east. His feet stopped. Somehow they had carried him
without mishap through the darkness from Yoshida Hill, but now they were
reluctant to go on.
       In the shadow of the dike, he gathered together twigs, chips of wood and
anything else that would burn, then began scratching at his flint. The raising of
the first tiny flame required work and patience, but eventually some dry leaves
caught. With the care of a woodworker, he began piling on sticks and small

branches. After a certain point, the fire rapidly took on life, and as it drew the
wind, it fanned out toward its maker, ready to scorch his face.
       Musashi took the rice cakes his aunt had given him and toasted them one
by one in the flames. They turned brown and swelled up like bubbles, reminding
him of the New Year's celebrations of his childhood. The rice cakes had no
flavor but their own; they were neither salted nor sweetened. Chewing them, he
thought of the taste of the plain rice as the taste of the real world about him. "I'm
having my own New Year's celebration," he thought happily. As he warmed his
face by the flames and stuffed his mouth, the whole thing began to seem rather
amusing. "It's a good New Year's celebration! If even a wanderer like me has
five good rice cakes, then it must be that heaven allows everybody to celebrate
the New Year one way or another. I have the Kamo River to toast the New Year
with, and the thirty-six peaks of Higashiyama are my pine tree decorations! I
must cleanse my body and wait for the first sunrise."
       At the edge of the icy river, he untied his obi and removed his kimono and
underwear; then he plunged in and, splashing about like a water bird, washed
himself thoroughly.
       He was standing on the bank wiping his skin vigorously when the first rays
of dawn broke through a cloud and fell warmly on his back. He looked toward
the fire and saw someone standing on the dike above it, another traveler,
different in age and appearance, brought here by fate. Osugi.
       The old woman had seen him, too, and cried out in her heart, "He's here!
The troublemaker is here!" Overcome by joy and fear, she nearly fell down in a
swoon. She wanted to call to him, but her voice choked; her trembling body
would not do as it was told. Abruptly, she sat down in the shadow of a small
pine.
       "At last!" she rejoiced. "I've finally found him! Uncle Gon's spirit has led
me to him." In the bag hanging from her waist she was carrying a fragment of
Uncle Gon's bones and a lock of his hair.
       Each day since his death she'd talked to the dead man. "Uncle Gon," she'd
say, "even though you're gone, I don't feel alone. You stayed with me when I
vowed not to go back to the village without punishing Musashi and Otsū. You're
with me still. You may be dead, but your spirit is always beside me. We're
together forever. Look up through the grass at me and watch! I'll never let
Musashi go unpunished!"
       To be sure, Uncle Gon had been dead only a week, but Osugi was resolved
to keep faith with him until she, too, was reduced to ashes. In the past few days,

she had pressed her search with the furor of the terrible Kishimojin, who, before
her conversion by the Buddha, had killed other children to feed to her own—said
to have numbered five hundred, or one thousand, or ten thousand.
       Osugi's first real clue had been a rumor she'd heard in the street that there
was soon to be a bout between Musashi and Yoshioka Seijūrō. Then early the
previous evening, she had been among the onlookers who watched the sign
being posted on the Great Bridge at Gojō Avenue. How that had excited her! She
had read it through time and time again, thinking: "So Musashi's ambition has
finally got the better of him! They'll make a clown of him. Yoshioka will kill
him. Oh! If that happens, how will I be able to face the people at home? I swore
I myself would kill him. I must get to him before Yoshioka does. And take that
sniveling face back and hold it up by the hair for the villagers to see!" Then she
had prayed to the gods, to the bodhisattvas and to her ancestors for help.
       For all her fury and all her venom, she had come away from the Matsuo
house disappointed. Returning along the Kamo River, she had first taken the
firelight to be a beggar's bonfire. For no particular reason, she had stopped on the
dike and waited. When she caught sight of the muscular naked man emerging
from the river, oblivious of the cold, she knew it was Musashi.
       Since he had no clothes on, it would be a perfect time to catch him by
surprise and cut him down, but even her old dried-up heart would not let her do
that.
       She put her palms together and offered a prayer of thanks, just as she
would if she had already taken Musashi's head. "How happy I am! Thanks to the
favor of the gods and bodhisattvas, I have Musashi before my eyes. It couldn't be
mere chance! My constant faith has been rewarded; my enemy has been
delivered into my hands!" She bowed before heaven, firm in her belief that she
now had all the time in the world to complete her mission.
       The rocks along the water's edge seemed to float above the ground one by
one as the light struck them. Musashi put on his kimono, tied his obi tightly and
girded on his two swords. He knelt on hands and knees and bowed silently to the
gods of heaven and earth.
       Osugi's heart leaped as she whispered, "Now!"
       At that precise moment, Musashi sprang to his feet. Jumping nimbly over a
pool of water, he started walking briskly along the river's edge. Osugi, taking
care not to alert him to her presence, hurried along the dike.
       The roofs and bridges of the city began to form gentle white outlines in the
morning mist, but above, stars still hovered in the sky and the area along the foot

of Higashiyama was as black as ink. When Musashi reached the wooden bridge
at Sanjō Avenue, he went under it and reappeared at the top of the dike beyond,
taking long, manly strides. Several times Osugi came close to calling him but
checked herself.
       Musashi knew she was behind him. But he also knew that if he turned
around, she would come storming at him, and he'd be forced to reward her effort
with some show of defense, while at the same time not hurting her. "A
frightening opponent!" he thought. If he were still Takezō, back in the village, he
would have thought nothing of knocking her down and beating her until she spat
blood, but of course he could no longer do that.
       In reality he had more right to hate her than she him, but he wanted to
make her see that her feeling toward him was based on a horrible
misunderstanding. He was sure that if he could just explain things to her she
would cease regarding him as her eternal enemy. But since she'd carried her
festering grudge for so many years, there was no likelihood that he himself could
convince her now, not if he explained a thousand times. There was only one
possibility; stubborn though she was, she would certainly believe Matahachi. If
her own son told her exactly what had happened before and after Sekigahara, she
could no longer consider Musashi an enemy of the Hon'iden family, let alone the
abductor of her son's bride.
       He was drawing near the bridge, which was in an area that had flourished
in the late twelfth century, when the Taira family was at the peak of its fortunes.
Even after the wars of the fifteenth century, it had remained one of the most
populous sections of Kyoto. The sun was just beginning to reach the housefronts
and gardens, where broom marks from the previous night's thorough sweeping
were still visible, but at this early hour not a door was open.
       Osugi could make out his footprints in the dirt. Even these she despised.
       Another hundred yards, then fifty.
       "Musashi!" screamed the old woman. Balling her hands into fists, she
thrust her head forward and ran toward him. "You evil devil!" she shouted.
"Don't you have ears?"
       Musashi did not look back.
       Osugi ran on. Old as she was, her death-defying determination lent her
footsteps a brave and masculine cadence. Musashi kept his back to her, casting
about feverishly in his mind for a plan of action.
       All at once she sprang in front of him, screaming, "Stop!" Her pointed
shoulders and thin, emaciated ribs trembled. She stood there a moment, catching

her breath and gathering spit in her mouth.
        Not concealing a look of resignation, Musashi said as nonchalantly as he
could, "Well, if it isn't the Hon'iden dowager! What are you doing here?"
        "You insolent dog! Why shouldn't I be here? I'm the one who should ask
you that. I let you get away from me on Sannen Hill, but today I'll have that head
of yours!" Her scrawny neck suggested a game rooster, and her shrill voice,
which seemed set to whisk her protruding teeth out of her mouth, was more
frightening to him than a battle cry.
        Musashi's dread of the old woman had its roots in reminiscences from his
childhood days, the times when Osugi had caught him and Matahachi en gaged
in some mischief in the mulberry patch or the Hon'iden kitchen. He had been
eight or nine—just the age when the two of them were always up to something—
and he still remembered clearly how Osugi had shouted at them. He had fled in
terror, his stomach turning somersaults, and those memories made him shiver.
He had regarded her then as a hateful, ill-tempered old witch, and even now he
resented her betrayal of him when he returned to the village after Sekigahara.
Curiously, he had also grown accustomed to thinking of her as one person he
could never get the best of. Still, with the passage of time, his feelings toward
her had mellowed.
        With Osugi, it was quite the opposite. She could not rid herself of the
image of Takezō, the obnoxious and unruly little brat she had known since he
was a baby, the boy with the runny nose and sores on his head, his arms and legs
so long that he looked deformed. Not that she was unconscious of the passage of
time. She was old now; she knew that. And Musashi was grown. But she could
not overcome the urge to treat him as a vicious urchin. When she thought of how
this little boy had shamed her—revenge! It was not only a matter of vindicating
herself before the village. She had to see Musashi in his grave before she ended
up in her own.
        "There's no need for talk!" she screeched. "Either give me your head, or
prepare to feel my blade! Get ready, Musashi!" She wiped her lips with her
fingers, spat on her left hand and grabbed her scabbard.
        There was a proverb about a praying mantis attacking the imperial
carriage. Surely it must have been invented to describe the cadaverous Osugi
with her spindly legs attacking Musashi. She looked exactly like a mantis; her
eyes, her skin, her absurd stance, were all the same. And as Musashi stood on
guard, watching her approach as he might a child at play, his shoulders and chest
gave him the invincibility of a sturdy iron carriage.

       In spite of the incongruity of the situation, he was unable to laugh, for he
was suddenly filled with pity. "Come now, Granny, wait!" he begged, grabbing
her elbow lightly but firmly.
       "Wh-what are you doing?" she cried. Both her powerless arm and her teeth
shook with surprise. "C-c-coward!" she stammered. "You think you can talk me
out of this? Well, I've seen forty more New Years than you, and you can't trick
me. Take your punishment!" Osugi's skin was the color of red clay, her voice
filled with desperation.
       Musashi, nodding vigorously, said, "I understand; I know how you feel.
You've got the fighting spirit of the Hon'iden family in you, all right. I can see
you have the same blood as the first of the Hon'idens, the one who served so
bravely under Shimmen Munetsura."
      "Let go of me, you—! I'm not going to listen to flattery from somebody
      young enough to be my grandchild."
      "Calm down. It doesn't become an old person like you to be rash. I have
      something to say to you."
      "Your last statement before you meet your death?"
      "No; I want to explain."
      "I don't want any explanations from you!" The old woman drew herself up
      to her full height.
       "Well, then, I'll just have to take that sword away from you. Then when
Matahachi shows up, he can explain everything to you."
      "Matahachi?"
      "Yes. I sent him a message last spring."
      "Oh, you did, did you?"
      "I told him to meet me here on New Year's morning."
       "That's a lie!" shrieked Osugi, vigorously shaking her head. "You should
be ashamed, Musashi! Aren't you Munisai's son? Didn't he teach you that when
the time comes to die, you should die like a man? This is no time for playing
around with words. My whole life is behind this sword, and I have the support of
the gods and bodhisattvas. If you dare face it, face it!" She wrested her arm away
from him and cried, "Hail to the Buddha!" Unsheathing her sword and grasping
it with both hands, she lunged at his chest.
       He dodged. "Calm down, Granny, please!"
       When he tapped her lightly on the back, she screamed and whirled around
to face him. As she prepared to charge, she invoked the name of Kannon. "Praise
to Kannon Bosatsu! Praise to Kannon Bosatsu!" She attacked again.

       As she passed him, Musashi seized her wrist. "You'll just wear yourself
out, carrying on like that. Look, the bridge is just over there. Come with me that
far."
       Turning her head back over her shoulder, Osugi bared her teeth and pursed
her lips. "Phooey!" She spat with all the breath she had left.
       Musashi let go of her and moved aside, rubbing his left eye with his hand.
The eye burned as if a spark had struck it. He looked at the hand he had put to
his eye. There was no blood on it, but he couldn't open the eye. Osugi, seeing he
was off guard, charged with renewed strength, calling again on the name of
Kannon. Twice, three times she swung at him.
       On the third swing, preoccupied with his eye, he merely bent his body
slightly from the waist. The sword cut through his sleeve and scratched his
forearm.
       A piece of his sleeve fell off, giving Osugi the chance to see blood on the
white lining. "I've wounded him!" she screamed in ecstasy, waving her sword
wildly. She was as proud as if she had felled a great tree in one stroke, and the
fact that Musashi wasn't fighting back in no way dimmed her elation. She went
on shouting the name of the Kannon of Kiyomizudera, calling the deity down to
earth.
       In a noisy frenzy, she ran around him, attacking him from front and back.
Musashi did no more than shift his body to avoid the blows.
       His eye bothered him, and there was the scratch on his forearm. Although
he had seen the blow coming, he had not moved quickly enough to avoid it.
Never before had anyone gotten the jump on him or wounded him even slightly,
and since he had not taken Osugi's attack seriously, the question of who would
win, who lose, had never crossed his mind.
       But was it not true that by not taking her seriously, he had let himself be
wounded? According to The Art of War, no matter how slight the wound, he had
quite clearly been beaten. The old woman's faith and the point of her sword had
exposed for all to see his lack of maturity.
       "I was wrong," he thought. Seeing the folly of inaction, he jumped away
from the attacking sword and slapped Osugi heavily on the back, sending her
sprawling and her sword flying out of her hand.
       With his left hand Musashi picked up the sword, and with his right, lifted
Osugi into the crook of his arm.
       "Let me down!" she screamed, beating the air with her hands. "Are there
no gods? No bodhisattvas? I've already wounded him once! What am I going to

do? Musashi! Don't shame me like this! Cut off my head! Kill me now!"
        While Musashi, tight-lipped, strode along the path with the struggling
woman under his arm, she continued her hoarse protest. "It's the fortunes of war!
It's destiny! If this is the will of the gods, I'll not be a coward! ... When
Matahachi hears Uncle Gon died and I was killed trying to take revenge, he'll
rise up in anger and avenge us both; it'll be good medicine for him. Musashi, kill
me! Kill me now! ... Where are you going? Are you trying to add disgrace to my
death? Stop! Cut off my head now!"
        Musashi paid no attention, but when he arrived at the bridge, he began to
wonder what he was going to do with her.
        An inspiration came. Going down to the river, he found a boat tied to one
of the bridge piers. Gently, he lowered her into it. "Now, you just be patient and
stay here for a while. Matahachi will be here soon."
        "What are you doing?" she cried, trying to push aside his hands and the
reed mats in the bottom of the boat at the same time. "Why should Matahachi's
coming here make any difference? What makes you think he's coming? I know
what you're up to. You're not satisfied with just killing me; you want to humiliate
me too!"
       "Think what you like. It won't be long before you learn the truth." "Kill
       me!"
       "Ha, ha, ha!"
       "What's so funny? You should have no trouble cutting through this old neck
       with one swift stroke!"
        For lack of a better way of keeping her put, he tied her to the raised keel of
the boat. He then slid her sword back into its scabbard and laid it down neatly by
her side.
        As he started to leave, she taunted him, saying, "Musashi! I don't think you
understand the Way of the Samurai! Come back here, and I'll teach you."
"Later."
        He started up the dike, but she was making such a racket, he had to go
back and pile several reed mats over her.
        A huge red sun sprang up in flames above Higashiyama. Musashi watched
fascinated as it climbed, feeling its rays pierce the inner depths of his being. He
grew reflective, thinking that only once a year, when this new sun rose, did the
little worm of ego that binds man to his tiny thoughts have the chance to melt
and vanish under its magnificent light. Musashi was filled with the joy of being
alive.

Exultant, he shouted in the radiant dawn, "I'm still young!"
