Sasaki Kojirō


       Just south of Kyoto, the Yodo River wound around a hill called
Momoyama (the site of Fushimi Castle), then flowed on through the Yamashiro
Plain toward the ramparts of Osaka Castle, some twenty miles farther to the
southwest. Partly owing to this direct water link, each political ripple in the
Kyoto area produced immediate repercussions in Osaka, while in Fushimi it
seemed that every word spoken by an Osaka samurai, let alone an Osaka
general, was reported as a portent of the future.
       Around Momoyama, a great upheaval was in progress, for Tokugawa
Ieyasu had decided to transform the way of life that had flourished under
Hideyoshi. Osaka Castle, occupied by Hideyori and his mother, Yodogimi, still
clung desperately to the vestiges of its faded authority, as the setting sun holds
fast to its vanishing beauty, but real power resided at Fushimi, where Ieyasu had
chosen to live during his extended trips to the Kansai region. The clash between
old and new was visible everywhere. It could be discerned in the boats plying
the river, in the deportment of the people on the highways, in popular songs, and
in the faces of the displaced samurai searching for work.
       The castle at Fushimi was under repair, and the rocks disgorged from the
boats onto the riverbank formed a virtual mountain. Most of them were huge
boulders, at least six feet square and three or four feet high. They fairly sizzled
under a boiling sun. Though it was autumn by the calendar, the sweltering heat
was reminiscent of the dog days immediately following the early summer rainy
season.
       Willow trees near the bridge shimmered with a whitish glint, and a large
cicada zigzagged crazily from the river into a small house near the bank. The
roofs of the village, deprived of the gentle colors their lanterns swathed them in
at twilight, were a dry, dusty gray. In the heat of high noon, two laborers,
mercifully freed for half an hour from their backbreaking work, lay sprawled on
the broad surface of a boulder, chatting about what was on everybody's lips.
      "You think there'll be another war?"
      "I don't see why not. There doesn't seem to be anybody strong enough to
      keep things under control."
      "I guess you're right. The Osaka generals seem to be signing up all the rōnin

      they can find."
       They would, I suppose. Maybe I shouldn't say this too loud, but I heard the
Tokugawas are buying guns and ammunition from foreign ships."
       "If they are, why is Ieyasu letting his granddaughter Senhime marry
Hideyori?"
       "How should I know? Whatever he's doing, you can bet he has his reasons.
Ordinary people like us can't be expected to know what Ieyasu has in mind."
       Flies buzzed about the two. A swarm covered two nearby oxen. Still
hitched to empty timber carts, the beasts lazed in the sun, stolid, impassive and
drooling at the mouth.
       The real reason the castle was undergoing repairs was not known to the
lowly laborer, who assumed that Ieyasu was to stay there. Actually, it was one
phase of a huge building program, an important part of the Tokugawa scheme of
government. Construction work on a large scale was also being carried out in
Edo, Nagoya, Suruga, Hikone, Otsu and a dozen other castle towns. The purpose
was to a large extent political, for one of Ieyasu's methods of maintaining control
over the daimyō was to order them to undertake various engineering projects.
Since none was powerful enough to refuse, this kept the friendly lords too busy
to grow soft, while simultaneously forcing the daimyō who'd opposed Ieyasu at
Sekigahara to part with large portions of their incomes. Still another aim of the
government was to win the support of the common people, who profited both
directly and indirectly from extensive public works.
       At Fushimi alone, nearly a thousand laborers were engaged in extending
the stone battlements, with the incidental result that the town around the castle
experienced a sudden influx of peddlers, prostitutes and horseflies—all symbols
of prosperity. The masses were delighted with the good times Ieyasu had
brought, and merchants relished the thought that on top of all this there was a
good chance of war—bringing even greater profits. Goods were moving briskly,
and even now the bulk of them were military supplies. After fingering their
collective abacus, the larger entrepreneurs had concluded that this was where the
big money was.
       City folk were fast forgetting the balmy days of Hideyoshi's regime and
instead speculating on what might be gained in the days ahead. It made little
difference to them who was in power; so long as they could satisfy their own
petty wants, they saw no reason to complain. Nor did Ieyasu disappoint them in
this respect, for he contrived to scatter money as he might pass out candy to
children. Not his own money, to be sure, but that of his potential enemies.

        In agriculture, too, he was instituting a new system of control. No longer
were local magnates allowed to govern as they pleased or to conscript farmers at
will for outside labor. From now on, the peasants were to be permitted to farm
their lands—but to do very little else. They were to be kept ignorant of politics
and taught to rely on the powers that be.
        The virtuous ruler, to Ieyasu's way of thinking, was one who did not let the
tillers of the soil starve but at the same time ensured that they did not rise above
their station; this was the policy by which he intended to perpetuate Tokugawa
rule. Neither the townspeople nor the farmers nor the daimyō realized that they
were being carefully fitted into a feudal system that would eventually bind them
hand and foot. No one was thinking of what things might be like in another
hundred years. No one, that is, except Ieyasu.
        Nor were the laborers at Fushimi Castle thinking of tomorrow. They had
modest hopes of getting through the day, the quicker the better. Though they
talked of war and when it might break out, grand plans to maintain peace and
increase prosperity had nothing to do with them. Whatever happened, they could
not be much worse off than they were.
        "Watermelon! Anybody want a watermelon?" called a farmer's daughter,
who came around at this time every day. Almost as soon as she appeared, she
managed to make a sale to some men matching coins in the shadow of a large
rock. Jauntily, she went on from group to group, calling, "Won't you buy my
melons?"
        "You crazy? You think we've got money for watermelons?"
        "Over here! I'll be glad to eat one—if it's free."
        Disappointed because her initial luck had been deceptive, the girl
approached a young worker sitting between two boulders, his back propped
against one, his feet against the other, and his arms around his knees.
"Watermelon?" she asked, not very hopefully.
        He was thin, his eyes sunken, and his skin ruddily sunburned. A shroud of
fatigue dimmed his obvious youth; still, his closer friends would have
recognized him as Hon'iden Matahachi. Wearily he counted some grimy coins
into the palm of his hand and gave them to the girl.
        When he leaned back against the rock again, his head drooped morosely.
The slight effort had exhausted him. Gagging, he leaned to one side and began to
spit up on the grass. He lacked the little strength it would have taken to retrieve
the watermelon, which had tumbled from his knees. He stared dully at it, his
black eyes revealing no trace of strength or hope.

       "The swine," he mumbled weakly. He meant the people he would like to
strike back at: Okō, with her whitened face; Takezō, with his wooden sword. His
first mistake had been to go to Sekigahara; his second to succumb to the
lascivious widow. He had come to believe that but for these two events, he
would be at home in Miyamoto now, the head of the Hon'iden family, a husband
with a beautiful wife, and the envy of the village.
       "I suppose Otsū must hate me now ... though I wonder what she's doing."
In his present circumstances, thinking occasionally of his former fiancée was his
only comfort. When Okō's true nature had finally sunk in, he had begun to long
for Otsū again. He had thought of her more and more since the day he'd had the
good sense to break loose from the Yomogi Teahouse.
       On the night of his departure, he had discovered that the Miyamoto
Musashi who was acquiring a reputation as a swordsman in the capital was his
old friend Takezō. This severe shock was followed almost immediately by strong
waves of jealousy.
       With Otsū in mind, he had stopped drinking and attempted to slough off
his laziness and his bad habits. But at first he was unable to find any suitable
work. He cursed himself for having been out of the swim of things for five years,
while an older woman supported him. For a time it appeared as though it was too
late to change.
       "Not too late," he'd assured himself. "I'm only twenty-two. I can do
whatever I want, if I try!" While anyone might experience this sentiment, in
Matahachi's case it meant shutting his eyes, leaping over an abyss of five years,
and hiring himself out as a day laborer at Fushimi.
       Here he had worked hard, slaving steadily day after day while the sun beat
down on him from summer into fall. He was rather proud of himself for sticking
to it.
       "I'll show them all!" he was thinking now, despite his queasiness. "No
reason I can't make a name for myself. I can do anything Takezō can do! I can do
even more, and I will. Then I'll have my revenge, despite Okō. Ten years is all I
need."
       Ten years? He stopped to calculate how old Otsū would be by then. Thirty-
one! Would she stay single, wait for him all that time? Not likely. Matahachi had
no inkling of recent developments in Mimasaka, no way of knowing that his was
but a pipe dream, but ten years—never! It would have to be no more than five or
six. Within that time he would have to make a success of himself; that was all
there was to it. Then he could go back to the village, apologize to Otsū and

persuade her to marry him. "That's the only way!" he exclaimed. "Five years, six
at most." He stared at the watermelon and a glimmer of light returned to his
eyes.
       Just then one of his fellow workers rose up beyond the rock in front of
him, and resting his elbows on the boulder's broad top, called, "Hey, Matahachi.
What're you mumbling to yourself about? Say, your face is green. Watermelon
rotten?"
       Matahachi, though he forced a wan smile, was seized by another wave of
dizziness. Saliva streamed from his mouth as he shook his head. "It's nothing,
nothing at all," he managed to gasp. "Guess I got a little too much sun. Let me
take it easy here for an hour or so."
       The burly stone haulers gibed at his lack of strength, albeit good-naturedly.
One of them asked, "Why'd you buy a watermelon when you can't eat it?"
       "I bought it for you fellows," answered Matahachi. "I thought it'd make up
for not being able to do my share of the work."
       "Now, that was smart. Hey, men! Watermelon! Have some, on Matahachi."
       Splitting the melon on the corner of a rock, they fell to it like ants,
snatching greedily at the sweet, dripping hunks of red pulp. It was all gone when
moments later a man jumped up on a rock and yelled, "Back to work, all of
you!"
       The samurai in charge emerged from a hut, whip in hand, and the stench of
sweat spread over the earth. Presently the melody of a rock haulers' chantey rose
from the site, as a gigantic boulder was shifted with large levers onto rollers and
dragged along with ropes as thick as a man's arm. It advanced ponderously, like
a moving mountain.
       With the boom in castle construction, these rhythmical songs proliferated.
Though the words were rarely written down, no less a personage than Lord
Hachisuka of Awa, who was in charge of building Nagoya Castle, quoted several
verses in a letter. His lordship, who would hardly have had occasion to so much
as touch construction materials, had apparently learned them at a party. Simple
compositions, like the following, they'd become something of a fad in society as
well as among work crews.


      From Awataguchi we've pulled them—
      Dragged rock after rock after rock.
      For our noble Lord Tōgorō.

      Ei, sa, ei, sa ...
      Pull—ho! Drag—ho! Pull—ho! Drag—ho!
      His lordship speaks,
      Our arms and legs tremble.
      We're loyal to him—to the death.


        The letter writer commented, "Everybody, young and old alike, sings this,
for it is part of the floating world we live in."
        While the laborers at Fushimi were not aware of these social
reverberations, their songs did reflect the spirit of the times. The tunes popular
when the Ashikaga shogunate was in decline had been on the whole decadent
and had been sung mostly in private, but during the prosperous years of
Hideyoshi's regime, happy, cheerful songs were often heard in public. Later, with
the stern hand of Ieyasu making itself felt, the melodies lost some of their
rollicking spirit. As Tokugawa rule became stronger, spontaneous singing tended
to give way to music composed by musicians in the shōgun's employ.
        Matahachi rested his head on his hands. It burned with fever, and the
heave-ho singing buzzed indistinctly in his ears, like a swarm of bees. All alone
now, he lapsed into depression.
        "What's the use," he groaned. "Five years. Suppose I do work hard—
what'll it get me? For a whole day's work, I make only enough to eat that day. If I
take a day off, I don't eat."
        Sensing someone standing near him, he looked up and saw a tall young
man. His head was covered with a deep, coarsely woven basket hat, and at his
side hung a bundle of the sort carried by shugyōsha. An emblem in the form of a
half-open steel-ribbed fan adorned the front of his hat. He was gazing
thoughtfully at the construction work and sizing up the terrain.
        After a time he seated himself next to a flat, broad rock, which was just the
right height to serve as a writing table. He blew away the sand on top, along with
a line of ants marching across it, then with his elbows propped on the rock and
his head on his hands, resumed his intense survey of the surroundings. Though
the sun's glare hit him full in the face, he remained motionless, seemingly
impervious to the discomforting heat. He did not notice Matahachi, who was still
too miserable to care whether anyone was around or not. The other man meant
nothing to him. He sat with his back to the newcomer and spasmodically
retched.

      By and by the samurai became aware of his gagging. "You there," he said.
      "What's the matter?"
      "It's the heat,' answered Matahachi.
      "You're in pretty bad shape, aren't you?"
      "I'm a little better than I was, but I still feel dizzy."
       "I'll give you some medicine," said the samurai, opening his black-
lacquered pillbox and shaking some black pills into the palm of his hand. He
walked over and put the medicine in Matahachi's mouth.
      "You'll be all right in no time," he said.
      "Thanks."
      "Do you plan to rest here for a while longer?"
      "Yes."
      "Then do me a favor. Let me know if anybody comes—throw a pebble or
      something."
       He went back to his own rock, sat down, and took a brush from his writing
kit and a notebook from his kimono. He opened the pad on the rock and began to
draw. Under the brim of his hat, his eyes moved back and forth from the castle to
its immediate surroundings, taking in the main tower, the fortifications, the
mountains in the background, the river and the smaller streams.
       Just before the Battle of Sekigahara, this castle had been attacked by units
of the Western Army, and two compounds, as well as part of the moat, had
suffered considerable damage. Now the bastion was not only being restored but
also being strengthened, so that it would outclass Hideyori's stronghold at Osaka.
       Quickly but in great detail, the student warrior sketched a bird's-eye view
of the entire castle and on a second page began making a diagram of the
approaches from the rear.
       "Uh-oh!" exclaimed Matahachi softly. From out of nowhere the inspector
of works appeared and was standing behind the sketcher. Clad in half-armor,
with straw sandals on his feet, he stood there silently, as if waiting to be noticed.
Matahachi felt a pang of guilt for not having seen him in time to give warning. It
was too late now.
       Presently the student warrior lifted his hand to brush a fly off his sweaty
collar and in doing so caught sight of the intruder. As he looked up with startled
eyes, the inspector stared back angrily for a moment before stretching out a hand
toward the drawing. The student warrior grabbed his wrist and jumped up.
      "What do you think you're doing?" he shouted.
      The inspector seized the notebook and held it high in the air. "I'd like to

     have a look at this," he barked.
     "You have no right."
     "Just doing my job!"
     "Butting into other people's business—is that your job?"
     "Why? Shouldn't I look at it?"
     "An oaf like you wouldn't understand it."
     "I think I'd better keep it."
     "Oh, no you don't!" cried the student warrior, making a grab for the
     notebook. Both pulled at it, ripping it in half.
     "Watch yourself!" shouted the inspector. "You'd better have a good
     explanation, or I'll turn you in."
     "On whose authority? You an officer?"
     "That's right."
     "What's your group? Who's your commander?"
       "None of your business. But you might as well know that I'm under orders
to investigate anyone around here who looks suspicious. Who gave you
permission to make sketches?"
       "I'm making a study of castles and geographic features for future
reference. What's wrong with that?"
       "The place is swarming with enemy spies. They all have excuses like that.
It doesn't matter who you are. You'll have to answer some questions. Come with
me!"
     "Are you accusing me of being a criminal?"
     "Just hold your tongue and come along."
     "Rotten officials! Too used to making people cringe every time you open
     your big mouths!"
     "Shut up—let's go!"
     "Try and make me!" The student warrior was adamant.
       Angry veins popping up in his forehead, the inspector dropped his half of
the notebook, ground it under foot, and pulled out his truncheon. The student
warrior jumped back a pace to improve his position.
       "If you're not going to come along willingly, I'll have to tie you up and
drag you," said the inspector.
       Before the words were out, his adversary went into action. Uttering a great
howl, he seized the inspector by the neck with one hand, grabbed the lower edge
of his armor with the other, then hurled him at a large rock.
       "Worthless lout!" he screamed, but not in time to be heard by the inspector,

whose head split open on the rock like a watermelon. With a cry of horror,
Matahachi covered his face with his hands to protect it from the globs of red
pasty matter flying his way, while the student warrior quickly reverted to an
attitude of complete calm.
       Matahachi was appalled. Could the man be accustomed to murdering in
this brutal fashion? Or was his sangfroid merely the letdown that follows an
explosion of rage? Matahachi, shocked to the core, began to sweat profusely.
From all he could tell, the other man could hardly have reached the age of thirty.
His bony, sunburned face was blemished by pockmarks, and he appeared to have
no chin, though this may have been due to a curiously shrunken scar from a deep
sword wound.
       The student warrior was in no hurry to flee. He gathered up the torn
fragments of his notebook. Then he began looking quietly about for his hat,
which had flown off when he made his mighty throw. After finding it, he placed
it with care upon his head, once again concealing his eerie face from view. At a
brisk pace he took his leave, gathering speed until he seemed to be flying on the
wind.
       The whole incident had happened so fast that neither the hundreds of
laborers in the vicinity nor their overseers had noticed it. The workmen
continued to toil like drones, as the supervisors, armed with whips and
truncheons, bellowed orders at their sweating backs.
       But one particular pair of eyes had seen it all. Standing atop a high
scaffold commanding a view of the whole area was the general overseer of
carpenters and log cutters. Seeing that the student warrior was escaping, he
roared out a command, setting into motion a group of foot soldiers who had been
drinking tea below the scaffold.
       "What happened?"
       "Another fight?"
       Others heard the call to arms and soon stirred up a cloud of yellow dust
near the wooden gate of the stockade, which divided the construction site from
the village. Angry shouts rose from the gathering swarm of people.
      "It's a spy! A spy from Osaka!"
      "They'll never learn."
      "Kill him! Kill him!"
       Rock haulers, earth carriers and others, screaming as though the "spy"
were their personal enemy, bore down on the chinless samurai. He darted behind
an oxcart shambling through the gate and tried to slip out, but a sentinel caught

sight of him and tripped him with a nail-studded staff.
       From the overseer's scaffold came the cry: "Don't let him escape!"
       With no hesitation, the crowd fell upon the miscreant, who counterattacked
like a trapped beast. Wresting the staff from the sentinel, he turned on him and
with the point of the weapon knocked him down headfirst. After downing four or
five more men in similar fashion, he drew his huge sword and took an offensive
stance. His captors fell back in terror, but as he prepared to cut his way out of the
circle, a barrage of stones descended on him from all directions.
       The mob vented its wrath in earnest, its mood all the more murderous
because of a deep-seated distaste for all shugyōsha. Like most commoners, these
laborers considered the wandering samurai useless, nonproductive and arrogant.
       "Stop acting like stupid churls!" cried the beleaguered samurai, appealing
for reason and restraint. Though he fought back, he seemed more concerned with
chiding his attackers than with avoiding the rocks they hurled. More than a few
innocent bystanders were injured in the melee.
       Then, in a trice, it was all over. The shouting ceased, and the laborers
began moving back to their work stations. In five minutes, the great construction
site was exactly as it had been before, as though nothing had happened. The
sparks flying from the various cutting instruments, the whinnying of horses half
addled by the sun, the mind-numbing heat—all returned to normal.
       Two guards stood over the collapsed form, which had been trussed up with
a thick hemp rope. "He's ninety percent dead," said one, "so we may as well
leave him here till the magistrate comes." He looked around and spotted
Matahachi. "Hey, you there! Stand watch over this man. If he dies, it doesn't
make any difference."
       Matahachi heard the words, but his head could not quite take in either their
import or the meaning of the event he had just witnessed. It all seemed like a
nightmare, visible to his eyes, audible to his ears, but not comprehensible to his
brain.
       "Life's so flimsy," he thought. "A few minutes ago he was absorbed in his
sketching. Now he's dying. He wasn't very old."
       He felt sorry for the chinless samurai, whose head, lying sideways on the
ground, was black with dirt and gore, his face still contorted with anger. The
rope anchored him to a large rock. Matahachi wondered idly why the officials
had taken such precautions when the man was too near death to make a sound.
Or maybe already dead. One of his legs lay grotesquely exposed through a long
rip in his hakama, the white shinbone protruding from the crimson flesh. Blood

was sprouting from his scalp, and wasps had begun to hover around his matted
hair. Ants nearly covered his hands and feet.
       "Poor wretch," thought Matahachi. "If he was studying seriously, he must
have had some great ambition in life. Wonder where he's from ... if his parents
are still alive." Matahachi was seized by a peculiar doubt: was he really
bemoaning the man's fate, or was he bothered by the vagueness of his own
future? "For a man with ambition," he reflected, "there ought to be a cleverer
way to get ahead."
       This was an age that fanned the hopes of the young, urged them to cherish
a dream, prodded them to improve their status in life. An age, indeed, in which
even someone like Matahachi might have visions of rising from nothing to
become the master of a castle. A modestly talented warrior could get by simply
by traveling from temple to temple and living on the charity of the priests. If he
was lucky, he might be taken in by one of the provincial gentry, and if he was
still more fortunate, might receive a stipend from a daimyō.
       Still, of all the young men who set out with high hopes, only one in a
thousand actually ended up finding a position with an acceptable income. The
rest had to be content with what satisfaction they could derive from the
knowledge that theirs was a difficult and dangerous calling.
       As Matahachi contemplated the samurai lying before him, the whole idea
began to seem utterly stupid. Where could the path Musashi was following
possibly lead? Matahachi's desire to equal or surpass his boyhood friend hadn't
abated, but the sight of the bloodied warrior made the Way of the Sword seem
vain and foolish.
       Horror-stricken, he realized that the warrior was moving, and his train of
thought stopped short. The man's hand reached out like a turtle's flipper and
clawed at the ground. Feebly he lifted his torso, raised his head and pulled the
rope taut.
       Matahachi could hardly believe his eyes. As the man inched along the
ground, he dragged behind him the four-hundred-pound rock securing his rope.
One foot, two feet—it was a display of superhuman strength. No muscle man on
any rock-hauling crew could have done it, though many boasted of the strength
of ten or twenty men. The samurai lying on the threshold of death was possessed
by some demonic force, which enabled him to far surpass the power of an
ordinary mortal.
       A gurgle came from the dying man's throat. He was trying desperately to
speak, but his tongue had turned black and dry, making it impossible for him to

form the words. Breath came in cracked, hollow hisses; eyes popping from their
sockets stared imploringly at Matahachi.
       "Pl—lul—poo—loo—ees . . ."
       Matahachi gradually understood he was saying "please." Then a different
sound, all but inarticulate, Matahachi made out to be "beg you." But it was the
man's eyes that really spoke. Therein were the last of his tears and the certainty
of death. His head fell back; his breathing ceased. As more ants started coming
out of the grass to explore the dust-whitened hair, a few even entering a blood-
caked nostril, Matahachi could see the skin under his kimono collar take on a
blackish-blue cast.
       What had the man wanted him to do? Matahachi felt haunted by the
thought that he had incurred an obligation. The samurai had come upon him
when he was sick and had had the kindness to give him medicine. Why had fate
blinded Matahachi when he should have been warning the man of the inspector's
approach? Was this destined to have occurred?
       Matahachi tentatively touched the cloth-wrapped bundle on the dead man's
obi. The contents would surely reveal who the man was and where he was from.
Matahachi suspected that his dying wish had been to have some memento
delivered to his family. He detached the bundle, as well as the pillbox, and
stuffed them quickly inside his own kimono.
       He debated whether to cut off a lock of hair for the man's mother, but
while staring into the fearsome face, he heard footsteps approaching. Peeking
from behind a rock, he saw samurai coming for the corpse. If he were caught
with the dead man's possessions, he'd be in serious trouble. He crouched down
low and made his way from shadow to shadow behind the rocks, sneaking away
like a field rat.
       Two hours later he arrived at the sweetshop where he was staying. The
shopkeeper's wife was by the side of the house, rinsing herself off from a
washbasin. Hearing him moving about inside, she showed a portion of her white
flesh from behind the side door and called, "Is that you, Matahachi?"
       Answering with a loud grunt, he dashed into his own room and grabbed a
kimono and his sword from a cabinet; he then knotted a rolled towel around his
head and prepared to slip into his sandals again.
      "Isn't it dark in there?" called the woman.
      "No, I can see well enough."
      "I'll bring you a lamp."
      "No need to. I'm going out."

      "Aren't you going to wash?"
      "No. Later."
       He rushed out into the field and swiftly moved away from the shabby
house. A few minutes later he looked back to see a group of samurai, no doubt
from the castle, come from beyond the miscall thus in the field. They entered the
sweetshop from both front and rear.
       "That was a close call," he thought. "Of course, I didn't really steal
anything. I just took it in custody. I had to. He begged me to."
       To his way of thinking, as long as he admitted that the articles were not
his, he had committed no crime. At the same time, he realized he could never
again show his face at the construction site.
       The miscanthus came up to his shoulders, and a veil of evening mist
floated above it. No one could see him from a distance; it would be easy to get
away. But which way to go was a difficult choice, all the more so since he
strongly felt that good luck lay in one direction and bad luck in another.
       Osaka? Kyoto? Nagoya? Edo? He had no friends in any of those places; he
might as well roll dice to decide where to go. With dice, as with Matahachi, all
was chance. When the wind blew, it would waft him along with it.
       It seemed to him that the farther he walked, the deeper he went into the
miscanthus. Insects buzzed about him, and the descending mist dampened his
clothes. The soaked hems curled around his legs. Seeds caught at his sleeves. His
shins itched. The memory of his noonday nausea was gone now and he was
painfully hungry. Once he felt himself out of the reach of his pursuers, it became
agony to walk.
       An overwhelming urge to find a place to lie down and rest carried him the
length of the field, beyond which he spotted the roof of a house. Drawing nearer,
he saw that the fence and gate were both askew, apparently damaged by a recent
storm. The roof needed fixing too. Yet at one time the house must have belonged
to a wealthy family, for there was a certain faded elegance about it. He imagined
a beautiful court lady seated in a richly curtained carriage approaching the house
at a stately pace.
       Going through the forlorn-looking gate, he found that both the main house
and a smaller detached house were nearly buried in weeds. The scene reminded
him of a passage by the poet Saigyō that he had been made to learn as a child:


      I heard that a person I knew lived in Fushimi and went to pay him a call,

but the garden was so overgrown! I couldn't even see the path. As the insects
sang, I composed this poem:


     Pressing through the weeds,
     I hide my tearful feelings
     In the folds of my sleeve.
           In the dew-laden garden
           Even lowly insects weep.


        Matahachi's heart was chilled as he crouched near the house, whispering
the words so long forgotten.
        Just as he was about to conclude the house was empty, a red light appeared
from deep inside. Presently he heard the pining strains of a shakuhachi, the
bamboo flute mendicant priests played when begging on the streets. Looking
inside, he discovered the player was indeed a member of that class. He was
seated beside the hearth. The fire he had just lit grew brighter, and his shadow
loomed larger on the wall. He was playing a mournful tune, a solitary lament on
the loneliness and melancholy of autumn, intended for no ears but his own. The
man played simply, without flourish, giving Matahachi the impression he took
little pride in his playing.
        When the melody came to an end, the priest sighed deeply and launched
into a lament.
        "They say when a man is forty, he is free from delusion. But look at me!
Forty-seven when I destroyed my family's good name. Forty-seven! And still I
was deluded; contrived to lose everything—income, position, reputation. Not
only that; I left my only son to fend for himself in this wretched world... . For
what? An infatuation?
        "It's mortifying—never again could I face my dead wife, nor the boy,
wherever he is. Ha! When they say you're wise after forty, they must be talking
about great men, not dolts like me. Instead of thinking myself wise because of
my years, I should have been more careful than ever. It's madness not to, where
women are concerned."
        Standing his shakuhachi on end in front of him and propping both hands
on the mouthpiece, he went on. "When that business with Otsū came up, nobody
would forgive me any longer. It's too late, too late."

        Matahachi had crept into the next room. He listened but was repelled by
what he saw. The priest's cheeks were sunken, his shoulders had a pointed, stray-
dog air, and his hair was sheenless. Matahachi crouched in silence; in the
flickering firelight the man's form summoned up visions of demons of the night.
        "Oh, what am I to do?" moaned the priest, lifting his sunken eyes to the
ceiling. His kimono was plain and dingy, but he also wore a black cassock,
indicating he was a follower of the Chinese Zen master P'u-hua. The reed
matting on which he sat, and which he rolled up and carried with him wherever
he went, was probably his only household possession—his bed, his curtain, and
in bad weather, his roof.
        "Talking won't bring back what I've lost," he said, "Why wasn't I more
careful! I thought I understood life. I understood nothing, let my status go to my
head! I behaved shamelessly toward a woman. No wonder the gods deserted me.
What could be more humiliating?"
        The priest lowered his head as though apologizing to someone, then
lowered it still farther. "I don't care about myself. The life I have now is good
enough for me. It's only right I should do penance and have to survive without
outside help.
        "But what have I done to Jōtarō? He'll suffer more for my misconduct than
I. If I were still in Lord Ikeda's service, he'd now be the only son of a samurai
with an income of five thousand bushels, but because of my stupidity, he's
nothing. What's worse, one day, when he's grown, he'll learn the truth."
        For a time he sat with his hands covering his face, then suddenly stood up.
"I must stop this—feeling sorry for myself again. The moon's out; I'll go walk in
the field—rid myself of these old grievances and ghosts."
        The priest picked up his shakuhachi and shuffled listlessly out of the
house. Matahachi thought he saw a hint of a stringy mustache under the
emaciated nose. "What a strange person!" he thought. "He's not really old, but
he's so unsteady on his feet." Suspecting the man might be a little insane, he felt
a tinge of pity for him.
        Fanned by the evening breeze, the flames from the broken kindling were
beginning to scorch the floor. Entering the empty room, Matahachi found a
pitcher of water and poured some on the fire, reflecting as he did so on the
priest's carelessness.
        It wouldn't matter much if this old deserted house burned to the ground,
but what if instead it were an ancient temple of tsuka or Kamakura period?
Matahachi felt a rare spasm of indignation. "It's because of people like him that

the ancient temples in Nara and on Mount Kōya are destroyed so often," he
thought. "These crazy vagabond priests have no property, no family of their own.
They don't give a thought to how dangerous fire is. They'll light one in the main
hall of an old monastery, right next to the murals, just to warm their own
carcasses, which are of no use to anyone.
       "Now, there's something interesting," he mumbled, turning his eyes toward
the alcove. It wasn't the graceful design of the room nor the remains of a
valuable vase that had attracted his attention, but a blackened metal pot, beside
which stood a sake jar with a chipped mouth. In the pot was some rice gruel, and
when he shook the jar, it made a cheerful gurgling sound. He smiled broadly,
grateful for his good fortune and oblivious, as any hungry man might be, to the
property rights of others.
       He promptly drained off the sake in a couple of long swallows, emptied
the rice pot and congratulated himself on the fullness of his belly.
       Nodding sleepily beside the hearth, he became conscious of the rainlike
buzz of insects coming from the dark field outside—not Only from the field but
from the walls, the ceiling and the rotting tatami mats.
       Just before drifting off to sleep, he remembered the bundle he had taken
from the dying warrior. He roused himself and untied it. The cloth was a soiled
piece of crepe dyed with a dark red sappanwood dye. It contained a washed and
bleached undergarment, together with the usual articles travelers carry.
Unfolding the garment, he found an object the size and shape of a letter scroll,
wrapped with great care in oil paper. There was also a purse, which fell with a
loud clink from a fold in the fabric. Made of purple-dyed leather, it contained
enough gold and silver to make Matahachi's hand shake with fear. "This is
someone else's money, not mine," he reminded himself.
       Undoing the oil paper around the longer object revealed a scroll, wound on
a Chinese-quince roller, with a gold brocade end cloth. He immediately sensed
that it contained some important secret and with great curiosity put the scroll
down in front of him and slowly unrolled it. It said:


                                    CERTIFICATE
      On sacred oath I swear that I have transmitted to Sasaki Kojirō the
following seven secret methods of the Chūjō Style of swordsmanship:

      Overt—Lightning style, wheel style, rounded style, floating-boat style
      Secret—The Diamond, The Edification, The Infinite


      Issued in the village of Jōkyōji in the Usaka Demesne of Echizen Province
on the _____ day of the _____ month.


      Kanemaki Jisai, Disciple of Toda Seigen


     On a piece of paper that seemed to have been attached later, there followed
a poem:


           The moon shining on
           The waters not present
           In an undug well
           Yields forth a man
           With neither shadow nor form.

       Matahachi realized he was holding a diploma given to a disciple who had
learned all his master had to teach, but the name Kanemaki Jisai meant nothing
to him. He would have recognized the name of Itō Yagorō, who under the name
Ittōsai had created a famous and highly admired style of swordsmanship. He did
not know that Jisai was Itō's teacher. Nor did he know that Jisai was a samurai of
splendid character, who had mastered the true style of Toda Seigen and had
retired to a remote village to pass his old age in obscurity, thereafter transmitting
Seigen's method to only a few select students.
       Matahachi's eyes went back to the first name. "This Sasaki Kojirō must
have been the samurai who was killed at Fushimi today," he thought. "He must
have been quite a swordsman to be awarded a certificate in the Chūjō Style,
whatever that is. Shame he had to die! But now I'm sure of it. It's just as I
suspected. He must've wanted me to deliver this to somebody, probably someone
in his birthplace."
       Matahachi said a short prayer to the Buddha for Sasaki Kojirō, then vowed
to himself that somehow he would carry out his new mission.

       To ward off the chill, he rebuilt the fire, then lay down by the hearth and
presently fell asleep.
       From somewhere in the distance came the sound of the old priest's
shakuhachi. The mournful tune, seemingly searching for something, calling out
to someone, went on and on, a poignant wave hovering over the rushes of the
field.
