The Handsome Young Man


       Gradually obscured by the wintry noonday mist, the sunlit island of Awaji
faded into the distance. The flapping of the great sail in the wind drowned out
the sound of the waves. The boat, which plied several times each month between
Osaka and Awa Province in Shikoku, was crossing the Inland Sea on its way to
Osaka. Although its cargo consisted mostly of paper and indigo dye, a distinctive
odor betrayed it was carrying contraband, in the form of tobacco, which the
Tokugawa government had forbidden the people to smoke, sniff or chew. There
were also passengers on board, mostly merchants, either returning to the city or
visiting it for the year-end trading.
       "How's it going? Making lots of money, I bet."
       "Not at all! Everybody says things are booming in Sakai, but you couldn't
prove it by me."
       "I hear there's a shortage of workmen there. Heard they need gunsmiths."
Conversation in another group went along similar lines.
       "I supply battle equipment myself—flagstaffs, armor, that sort of thing. I'm
certainly not making as much as I used to, though."
      "Is that so?"
      "Yes, I guess the samurai are learning how to add."
      "Ha, ha!"
       "It used to be that when the freebooters brought in their loot, you could re-
dye or repaint things and sell them right back to the armies. Then after the next
battle, the stuff would come back and you could fix it up and sell it again."
       One man was gazing out over the ocean and extolling the riches of the
countries beyond it. "You can't make money at home anymore. If you want real
profits, you have to do what Naya 'Luzon' Sukezaemon or Chaya Sukejirō did.
Go into foreign trade. It's risky, but if you're lucky, it can really pay off."
       "Well," said another man, "even if things aren't so good for us these days,
from the samurai's viewpoint we're doing very well. Most of them don't even
know what good food tastes like. We talk about the luxuries the daimyō enjoy,
but sooner or later they have to put on their leather and steel and go out and get
killed. I feel sorry for them; they're so busy thinking about their honor and the
warrior's code they can't ever sit back and enjoy life."

       "Isn't that the truth? We complain about bad times and all, but the only
thing to be today is a merchant."
       "You're right. At least we can do what we want."
       "All we really have to do is make a show of bowing down before the
samurai, and a little money makes up for a lot of that."
       "If you're going to live in this world, might as well have a good time."
"That's the way I see it. Sometimes I feel like asking the samurai what they're
getting out of life."
       The woolen carpet this group had spread for themselves to sit on was
imported—evidence that they were better off than other elements of the
population. After Hideyoshi's death, the luxuries of the Momoyama period had
passed largely into the hands of merchants, rather than samurai, and these days
the richer townspeople were the ones with elegant sake-serving sets and
beautiful, expensive travel equipment. Even a small businessman was normally
better off than a samurai with an allowance of five thousand bushels of rice per
year, which was considered a princely income by most samurai.
      "Never much to do on these trips, is there?"
      "No. Why don't we have a little card game to pass the time."
      "Why not?"
       A curtain was hung, mistresses and underlings brought sake, and the men
began playing umsummo, a game recently introduced by Portuguese traders, for
unbelievable stakes. The gold on the table could have saved whole villages from
famine, but the players tossed it about like gravel.
       Among the passengers were several people the rich merchants might well
have questioned as to what they were getting out of life—a wandering priest,
some rōnin, a Confucian scholar, a few professional warriors. Most of them,
after witnessing the beginning of the ostentatious card game, sat down beside
their baggage and stared disapprovingly at the sea.
      One young man was holding something round and furry in his lap, telling it
      from time to time to "Sit still!"
      "What a nice little monkey you have. Is it trained?" asked another
      passenger.
      "Yes."
      "You've had him for some time, then?"
      "No, I found him not long ago in the mountains between Tosa and Awa."
      "Oh, you caught him yourself?"
      "Yes, but the older monkeys almost scratched me to pieces before I got

      away."
       As he talked, the young man concentrated intently on picking fleas off the
animal. Even without the monkey, he would have attracted attention, for both his
kimono and the short red cloak he wore over it were decidedly fancy. His front
hair wasn't shaved, and his topknot was tied with an unusual purple band. His
clothing suggested he was still a boy, but these days it wasn't as easy as it used to
be to tell a person's age from his apparel. With the rise of Hideyoshi, clothing in
general had become more colorful. It was not unknown for men of twenty-five
or so to continue to dress like boys of fifteen or sixteen and leave their forelocks
uncut.
       His skin glowed with youth, his lips were a healthy red, and his eyes were
bright. On the other hand, he was solidly built, and there was a certain adult
severity about his thick eyebrows and the upward curve at the corners of his
eyes.
       "Why do you keep squirming?" he said impatiently, rapping the monkey
sharply on the head. The innocence with which he was picking off the fleas
added to the impression of youthfulness.
       His social status was also difficult to ascertain. Since he was traveling, he
wore the same straw sandals and leather socks everyone else wore. So there was
no clue there, and he seemed perfectly at home among the wandering priest, the
puppeteer, the ragged samurai and the unwashed peasants on board. He could
easily be taken for a rōnin, yet there was something that hinted at a higher status,
namely the weapon slung slantwise across his back on a leather strap. It was a
long, straight battle sword, large and splendidly made. Nearly everyone who
spoke to the youth remarked on its fineness.
       Gion Tōji, standing some distance away, was impressed by the weapon.
Yawning and thinking that not even in Kyoto were swords of such high quality
often seen, he grew curious as to its owner's background.
       Tōji was bored. His trip, which had lasted fourteen days, had been vexing,
tiring and fruitless, and he longed to be once again among people he knew. "I
wonder if the runner arrived in time," he mused. "If he did, she'll certainly be at
the dock in Osaka to meet me." He tried, by conjuring up Okō's face, to alleviate
his boredom.
       The reason behind his trip was the shaky financial condition of the House
of Yoshioka, brought on by Seijūrō's having lived beyond his means. The family
was no longer wealthy. The house on Shijō Avenue was mortgaged and in
danger of being seized by merchant creditors. Aggravating the situation were

countless other year-end obligations; selling every single family possession
would not produce enough funds to meet the bills that had already piled up.
Faced with this, Seijūrō's only comment had been, "How did this happen?"
       Tōji, feeling responsible for having encouraged the Young Master's
extravagance, had said that the matter should be left up to him. He promised that
he would settle things somehow.
       After racking his brains, he'd come up with the idea of building a new and
bigger school on the vacant lot next to the Nishinotōin, where a much larger
number of students could be accommodated. According to his reasoning, this
was no time to be exclusive. With all sorts of people around wanting to learn the
martial arts and the daimyō crying for trained warriors, it would be in the
interests of everyone to have a bigger school and turn out a great number of
trained swordsmen. The more he thought about it, the more he deluded himself
into thinking it was the school's sacred duty to teach Kempō's style to as many
men as possible.
       Seijūrō wrote a circular to that effect, and thus armed, Tōji set out to solicit
contributions from former students in western Honshu, Kyushu and Shikoku.
There were many men in various feudal domains who had studied under Kempō,
and most of those still alive were now samurai of enviable status. As it turned
out, however, for all the earnestness of Tōji's pleas, not many were ready to
make substantial donations or subscribe on such short notice. With discouraging
frequency, the answer had been, "I'll write you about it later," "We'll see about it
the next time I'm in Kyoto," or something equally evasive. The contributions
Tōji was returning with amounted to but a fraction of what he'd anticipated.
       The endangered household was not, strictly speaking, Tōji's own, and the
face that came to mind now was not Seijūrō's but Okō's. But even hers could
divert him only superficially, and soon he became fidgety again. He envied the
young man picking the fleas off his monkey. He had something to do to kill time.
Tōji walked over and tried to strike up a conversation.
      "Hello, there, young fellow. Going to Osaka?"
      Without actually raising his head, the young man lifted his eyes a bit and
      said, "Yes."
      "Does your family live there?"
      "No."
      "Then you must be from Awa."
      "No, not there either." This was said with a certain finality.
      Tōji lapsed into silence for a time before he made another try. "That's quite

      a sword you have there," he said.
        Seemingly happy to have the weapon praised, the young man rearranged
himself to face Tōji and replied genially, "Yes, it's been in my family a long
time. It's a battle sword, but I plan to get a good swordsmith in Osaka to remount
it, so I can draw it from my side."
      "It's too long for that, isn't it?"
      "Oh, I don't know. It's only three feet."
      "That's pretty long."
      Smiling, the youth replied confidently, "Anybody should be able to handle a
      sword that long."
        "Oh, it could be used if it was three feet long, or even four feet," said Tōji
reproachfully. "But only an expert could handle it with ease. I see a lot of fellows
swaggering around with huge swords these days. They look impressive, but
when the going gets rough, they turn and run. What style did you study?" In
matters pertaining to swordsmanship, Tōji could not conceal a feeling of
superiority over this mere boy.
        The young man flashed a questioning look at Tōji's smug face and replied,
"The Tomita Style."
        "The Tomita Style is for use with a shorter sword than that," said Tōji
authoritatively.
        "The fact that I learned the Tomita Style doesn't mean I have to use a
shorter sword. I don't like to be imitative. My teacher used a shorter sword, so I
decided to use a long one. That got me thrown out of the school."
        "You young people do seem to take pride in being rebellious. What
happened then?"
        "I left Jōkyōji Village in Echizen and went to Kanemaki Jisai. He'd also
discarded the Tomita Style, then developed the Chūjō Style. He sympathized
with me, took me in as a disciple, and after I'd studied under him four years, he
said I was ready to go out on my own."
        "These country teachers are all quick to pass out certificates."
        "Oh, not Jisai. He wasn't like that. In fact, the only other person he had
ever given his certificate to was Itō Yagorō Ittōsai. After I made up my mind to
be the second man to get formally certified, I worked at it very hard. Before I
was through, though, I was suddenly called home because my mother was
dying."
        "Where's your home?"
        "Iwakuni in Suō Province. After I went home, I practiced every day in the

neighborhood of Kintai Bridge, cutting down swallows on the wing and slicing
willow branches. That way I developed some techniques of my own. Before my
mother died, she gave me this sword and told me to take good care of it, because
it was made by Nagamitsu."
       "Nagamitsu? You don't say!"
       "It doesn't bear his signature on the tang, but it's always been thought to be
his work. Where I come from, it's a well-known sword; people call it the Drying
Pole." Though reticent earlier, on subjects he liked he would talk at great length,
even volunteer information. Once started, he rattled on, paying little attention to
his listener's reaction. From this, as well as from his account of his earlier
experiences, it appeared that he was of stronger character than might have been
inferred from his taste in clothes.
       At one point, the youth stopped talking for a moment. His eyes grew
cloudy and pensive. "While I was in Suō," he murmured, "Jisai took sick. When
I heard about it from Kusanagi Tenki, I actually broke down and cried. Tenki
was at the school long before I was and was still there when the master was on
his sickbed. Tenki was his nephew, but Jisai didn't even consider giving him a
certificate. Instead he told him he'd like to give me a certificate, along with his
book of secret methods. He not only wanted me to have them but had hoped to
see me and give them to me personally." The young man's eyes moistened with
the recollection.
       Tōji had not the slightest whit of empathy with this handsome, emotional
youth, but talking to him was better than being alone and bored. "I see," he said,
feigning great interest. "And he died while you were away?"
       "I wish I could have gone to him as soon as I heard of his illness, but he
was in Kōzuke, hundreds of miles from Suō. And then my mother finally died
about the same time, so it was impossible for me to be with him at the end."
       Clouds hid the sun, giving the whole sky a grayish cast. The ship began to
roll, and foam blew in over the gunwales.
       The young man continued his sentimental tale, the gist of which was that
he had closed up the family residence in Suō and, in an exchange of letters, had
arranged to meet his friend Tenki on the spring equinox. It was unlikely that
Jisai, who had no close kin, had left much property, but he had entrusted Tenki
with some money for the young man, along with the certificate and the book of
secrets. Until they met on the appointed day at Mount Hōraiji in Mikawa
Province, halfway between Kōzuke and Awa, Tenki was supposedly traveling
around studying. The young man himself planned to spend the time in Kyoto,

studying and doing some sightseeing.
      Having finished his story, he turned to Tōji and asked, "Are you from
      Osaka?"
      "No, I'm from Kyoto."
      For a while, they were both silent, distracted by the noise of the waves and
      the sail.
       "Then you plan to try to make your way in the world through the martial
arts?" said Tōji. While the remark was innocent enough in itself, the look on
Tōji's face revealed condescension bordering on contempt. He had long since
had his fill of conceited young swordsmen who went around bragging about
their certificates and their books of secrets. It was his considered opinion that
there could not possibly be all that many expert swordsmen just wandering
around. Had not he himself been in the Yoshioka School for nearly twenty years,
and was he not still only a disciple, although a highly privileged one?
       The young man shifted his position and looked intently at the gray water.
"Kyoto?" he muttered, then turned again to Tōji and said, "I'm told there's a man
there named Yoshioka Seijūrō, the eldest son of Yoshioka Kempō. Is he still
active?"
      Tōji was in the mood to do some teasing.
      "Yes," he replied simply. "The Yoshioka School seems to be flourishing.
      Have you visited the place?"
      "No, but when I get to Kyoto, I'd like to have a match with this Seijūrō and
      see how good he is."
       Tōji coughed to suppress a laugh. He was fast growing to detest the young
man's brash self-confidence. Of course, he had no way of knowing Tōji's
position in the school, but if he were to find out, he would no doubt regret what
he had just said. With a twisted face and a contemptuous tone, Tōji asked, "And
I suppose you think you'd come away unscathed?"
       "Why not?" the youth snapped back. Now he was the one who wanted to
laugh, and laugh he did. "Yoshioka has a big house and a lot of prestige, so I
imagine Kempō must have been a great swordsman. But they say neither of his
sons amounts to much."
       "How can you be so sure before you've actually met them?"
       "Well, that's what the samurai in the other provinces say. I don't believe
everything I hear, but almost everybody seems to think the House of Yoshioka
will come to an end with Seijūrō and Denshichirō."
       Tōji longed to tell the youth to hold his tongue. He even thought for a

moment of making his identity known, but to bring the matter to a head at this
point would make him appear the loser. With as much restraint as he could
manage, he replied, "The provinces seem to be full of know-it-alls these days, so
I wouldn't be surprised if the House of Yoshioka is being underrated. But tell me
more about yourself. Didn't you say a while ago you'd figured out a way to kill
swallows on the wing?"
      "Yes, I said that."
      "And you did it with that great long sword?"
      "That's right."
      "Well, if you can do that, it should be easy for you to cut down one of the
      sea gulls swooping down over the ship."
       The youth did not answer immediately. It had suddenly dawned on him
that Tōji was up to no good. Staring at Tōji's grim lips, he said, "I could do it,
but I think it would be silly."
       "Well," said Tōji magniloquently, "if you're so good that you can disparage
the House of Yoshioka without having been there ..."
      "Oh, have I annoyed you?"
      "No; not at all," said Tōji. "But no one from Kyoto likes to hear the
      Yoshioka School talked down."
      "Ha! I wasn't telling you what I thought; I was repeating what I'd heard."
      "Young man!" said Tōji sternly.
      "What?"
       "Do you know what is meant by 'half-baked samurai'? For the sake of your
future, I warn you! You'll never get anywhere underestimating other people. You
brag about cutting down swallows and talk about your certificate in the Chūjō
Style, but you'd better remember that not everybody is stupid. And you'd better
start taking a good look at whoever you're talking to before you start boasting."
       "You think it's only bragging?"
       "Yes, I do." Thrusting out his chest, Tōji came closer. "Nobody really
minds listening to a young man boast of his accomplishments, but you shouldn't
carry it too far."
       When the young man said nothing, Tōji continued. "From the beginning
I've been listening to you carry on about yourself, and I haven't complained. But
the fact of the matter is that I am Gion Tōji, the chief disciple of Yoshioka
Seijūrō, and if you make one more disparaging remark about the House of
Yoshioka, I'll have it out of your hide!"
       By this time they had attracted the attention of the other passengers. Tōji,

having revealed his name and exalted status, swaggered off toward the stern of
the ship, growling ominously about the insolence of young people these days.
The youth followed him in silence, while the passengers gaped from a safe
distance.
       Tōji was not at all happy about the situation. Okō would be waiting for
him when the ship docked, and if he got into a fight now, there was bound to be
trouble with the officials later. Looking as unconcerned as possible, he propped
his elbows on the rail and gazed intently at the blue-black eddies forming under
the rudder.
      The youth tapped him on the back lightly. "Sir," he said, in a quiet voice
      that showed neither anger nor resentment.
      Tōji did not answer.
      "Sir," the young man repeated.
      Unable to keep up his show of nonchalance, Tōji asked, "What do you
      want?"
       "You called me a braggart in front of a lot of strangers, and I have my
honor to uphold. I feel constrained to do what you challenged me to do a few
minutes ago. I want you to be a witness."
       "What did I challenge you to do?"
       "You can't have forgotten already. You laughed when I told you I'd cut
down swallows on the wing and dared me to try cutting down a sea gull."
"Hmm, I did suggest that, didn't I?"
      "If I cut one down, will it convince you I'm not just talking?"
      "Well ... yes, it will."
      "All right, I'll do it."
       "Fine, splendid!" Tōji laughed sarcastically. "But don't forget, if you
undertake this just for pride's sake and fail, you'll really be laughed at."
      "I'll take that chance."
      "I've no intention of stopping you."
      "And you will stand by as a witness?"
      "Why, I'd be only too glad to!"
       The young man took a position on a lead plate in the center of the
afterdeck and moved his hand toward his sword. As he did so, he called out
Tōji's name. Tōji, staring curiously, asked what he wanted, and the youth,
speaking with great seriousness, said, "Please have some sea gulls fly down in
front of me. I'm ready to cut down any number of them."
       Tōji suddenly recognized the similarity between what was going on and

the plot of a certain humorous tale attributed to the priest Ikkyū; the young man
had succeeded in making an ass of him. Angrily he shouted, "What sort of
nonsense is this? Anyone who could make sea gulls fly in front of him would be
able to cut them down."
       "The sea stretches out for thousands of miles, and my sword is only three
feet long. If the birds won't come near, I can't cut them down."
       Advancing a couple of paces, Tōji gloated, "You're just trying to work
yourself out of a bad spot. If you can't kill a sea gull on the wing, say you can't,
and apologize."
       "If I intended to do that, I wouldn't be standing here waiting. If the birds
won't come near, then I'll cut something else for you."
      "Such as ... ?"
      "Just come another five steps closer. I'll show you."
      Tōji came nearer, growling, "What are you up to now?"
       "I just want you to let me make use of your head—the head with which
you dared me to prove I wasn't just boasting. When you consider the matter, it
would be more logical to cut that off than to kill innocent sea gulls."
       "Have you lost your mind?" shouted Tōji. His head ducked reflexively, for
just at that instant, the young man whipped his sword from its scabbard and used
it. The action was so fast that the three-foot sword seemed no larger than a
needle.
       "Wh-wh-what?" cried Tōji, as he staggered backward and put his hands to
his collar. His head was still there, fortunately, and as far as he could tell, he was
unharmed.
       "Do you understand now?" asked the youth, turning his back and walking
off between the piles of baggage.
       Tōji was already crimson with embarrassment, when looking down at a
sunlit patch of the deck, he saw a peculiar-looking object, something like a little
brush. A horrible thought came into his mind, and he put his hand to the top of
his head. His topknot was gone! His precious topknot—the pride and joy of any
samurai! Horror on his face, he rubbed the top of his head and found that the
band tying his hair at the back was undone. The locks it had held together had
fanned out over his scalp.
       "That bastard!" Unmitigated rage swept through his heart. He knew now,
only too well, that the youth had been neither lying nor voicing an empty boast.
Young he was, but he was a spectacular swordsman. Tōji was amazed that
anyone so young could be so good, but the respect he felt in his mind was one

thing, and the choler in his heart something else again.
       When he raised his head and looked toward the bow, he saw that the youth
had returned to his previous seat and was searching around on the deck for
something. He was obviously off guard, and Tōji sensed that the opportunity for
revenge had presented itself. Spitting on the hilt of his sword, he grasped it
tightly and sneaked up behind his tormenter. He was not sure his aim was good
enough to take off the man's topknot without taking off his head too, but he did
not care. Body swollen and red, breathing heavily, he steeled himself to strike.
      Just then, a commotion arose among the card-playing merchants. "What's
      going on here? There aren't enough cards!"
      "Where'd they go?"
      "Look over there!"
      "I've already looked."
      As they were shouting and shaking out their carpet, one of them happened
      to glance skyward.
      "Up there! That monkey has them!"
       The other passengers, welcoming still another diversion, all looked up at
the simian in question, which was perched at the very top of the thirty-foot mast.
      "Ha, ha!" laughed one. "Quite a monkey—stole the cards, he did." "He's
      chewing them up."
      "No, he's making like he's dealing them."
      A single card came floating down. One of the merchants swept it up and
      said, "He must still have three or four more."
      "Somebody get up there and get the cards! We can't play without them."
      "Nobody's going to climb up there."
      "Why not the captain?"
      "I guess he could if he wanted to."
      "Let's offer him a little money. Then he'll do it."
       The captain heard the proposal, agreed, and took the money, but apparently
felt that as the master of the ship, he must first fix responsibility for the incident.
Standing on a pile of cargo, he addressed the passengers. "Just who does that
monkey belong to? Will the owner please come forward?"
       Not a soul answered, but a number of people who knew the monkey
belonged to the handsome young man eyed him expectantly. The captain also
knew, and his anger rose when the youth did not reply. Raising his voice still
higher, he said, "Isn't the owner here? ... If nobody owns the monkey, I'll take
care of him, but I don't want any complaints afterward."

       The monkey's owner was leaning against some luggage, apparently deep in
thought. A few passengers began to whisper disapprovingly; the captain looked
daggers at the youth. The cardplayers grumbled malevolently, and others began
to ask whether the young man was deaf and dumb or just insolent. The youth,
however, merely shifted his position a little to the side and acted as though
nothing had happened.
       The captain spoke again. "It appears that monkeys thrive on sea as well as
on land. As you can see, one has wandered in on us. Since it is ownerless, I
suppose we can do whatever we wish with it. Passengers, be my witness! As
captain, I have appealed to the owner to make himself known, but he hasn't done
so. If he later complains that he could not hear me, I ask you to stand by me!"
       "We're your witnesses!" cried the merchants, who by this time were
verging on apoplexy.
       The captain disappeared down the ladder into the hold. When he
reemerged, he was holding a musket with the slow-burning fuse already lit.
There was no question in anybody's mind but that he was ready to use it. Faces
turned from the captain to the monkey's owner.
       The monkey was enjoying himself immensely. High in the air, he was
playing with the cards and doing everything he could to annoy the people on
deck. Suddenly he bared his teeth, chattered, and ran to the yardarm, but once
there he did not seem to know what to do.
       The captain raised the musket and took aim. But as one of the merchants
pulled at his sleeve and urged him to fire, the owner called out, "Stop, Captain!"
       It was now the captain's turn to pretend not to hear. He squeezed the
trigger, the passengers bent down with their hands over their ears, and the
musket fired with a huge bang. But the shot went high and wide. At the last
instant, the young man had pushed the barrel of the gun out of line.
       Screaming with rage, the captain caught hold of the young man's chest. He
seemed for a time almost to be suspended there, for though he was strongly built,
he was short by the side of the handsome youth.
       "What's the matter with you?" shouted the young man. "You were about to
shoot down an innocent monkey with that toy of yours, weren't you?"
      "I was."
      "That's not a very nice thing to do, is it?"
      "I gave fair warning!"
      "And just how did you do that?"
      "Don't you have eyes and ears?"

      "Shut up! I'm a passenger on this ship. What's more, I'm a samurai. Do you
expect me to answer when a mere ship's captain stands up before his customers
and bellows as though he were their lord and master?"
      "Don't be impertinent! I repeated my warning three times. You must have
heard me. Even if you didn't like the way I said it, you could have shown some
consideration for the people who were inconvenienced by your monkey."
      "What people? Oh, you mean that bunch of tradesmen who've been
gambling behind their curtain?"
      "Don't talk so big! They paid three times as much fare as the others."
      "That doesn't make them anything but what they are—low-class,
irresponsible merchants, throwing around their gold where everybody can see it,
drinking their sake, and acting as though they owned the ship. I've been
watching them, and I don't like them at all. What if the monkey did run away
with their cards? I didn't tell him to. He was just imitating what they themselves
were doing. I see no need for me to apologize!"
      The young man looked fixedly at the rich merchants and directed a loud,
sardonic laugh their way.
