The Flying Horse


       Otsū and Jōtarō arrived at the barrier late at night, stopped over at an inn
and resumed their journey before the morning mist cleared. From Mount
Fudesute, they walked to Yonkenjaya, where they first felt the warmth of the
rising sun on their backs.
       "How beautiful!" exclaimed Otsū, pausing to look at the great golden orb.
She seemed full of hope and cheer. It was one of those wonderful moments when
all living things, even plants and animals, must feel satisfaction and pride in their
existence here on earth.
      Jōtarō said with obvious pleasure, "We're the very first people on the road.
      Not a soul ahead of us."
      "You sound boastful. What difference does it make?"
      "It makes a lot of difference to me."
      "Do you think it'll make the road shorter?"
       "Oh, it's not that. It's just feels good to be first, even on the road. You have
to admit it's better than following along behind palanquins or horses." "That's
true."
       "When no one else is on the road I'm on, I have the feeling it belongs to
me."
       "In that case, why don't you pretend you're a great samurai on horseback,
surveying your vast estates. I'll be your attendant." She picked up a bamboo
stick, and waving it ceremoniously, called out in singsong fashion, "Bow down,
all! Bow down for his lordship!"
       A man looked out inquiringly from under the eaves of a teahouse. Caught
playing like a child, she blushed and walked rapidly on.
       "You can't do that," Jōtarō protested. "You mustn't run away from your
master. If you do, I'll have to put you to death!"
      "I don't want to play anymore."
      "You're the one who was playing, not me."
      "Yes, but you started it. Oh, my! The man at the teahouse is still staring at
      us. He must think we're silly."
      "Let's go back there."
      "What for?"

      "I'm hungry."
      "Already?"
      "Couldn't we eat half of the rice balls we brought for lunch now?"
      "Be patient. We haven't covered two miles yet. If I let you, you'd eat five
      meals a day."
      "Maybe. But you don't see me riding in palanquins or hiring horses, the way
      you do."
       "That was only last night, and then only because it was getting dark and
we had to hurry. If you feel that way about it, I'll walk the whole way today."
      "It should be my turn to ride today."
      "Children don't need to ride."
      "But I want to try riding a horse. Can't I? Please."
      "Well, maybe, but only for today."
      "I saw a horse tied up at the teahouse. We could hire it."
      "No, it's still too early in the day."
      "Then you didn't mean it when you said I could ride!"
      "I did, but you're not even tired yet. It'd be a waste of money to rent a
      horse."
       "You know perfectly well I never get tired. I wouldn't get tired if we
walked a hundred days and a thousand miles. If I have to wait till I'm worn out,
I'll never get to ride a horse. Come on, Otsū, let's rent the horse now, while there
aren't any people ahead of us. It'd be a lot safer than when the road is crowded.
Please!"
       Seeing that if they kept this up, they would lose the time they had gained
by making an early start, Otsū gave in, and Jōtarō, sensing rather than waiting
for her nod of approval, raced back to the teahouse.
       Although there actually were four teahouses in the vicinity, as the name
Yonkenjaya indicated, they were located at various places on the slopes of
mounts Fudesute and Kutsukake. The one they had passed was the only one in
sight.
       Running up to the proprietor and stopping suddenly, Jōtarō shouted, "Hey,
there, I want a horse! Get one out for me."
       The old man was taking down the shutters, and the boy's lusty cry jarred
him into wakefulness. With a sour expression, he grumbled, "What's all this! Do
you have to yell so loud?"
       "I need a horse. Please get one ready right away. How much is it to
Minakuchi? If it's not too much, I may even take it all the way to Kusatsu."

       "Whose little boy are you anyway?"
       "I'm the son of my mother and my father," replied Jōtarō impudently. "I
thought you might be the unruly offspring of the storm god."
       "You're the storm god, aren't you? You look mad as a thunderbolt." "Brat!"
       "Just bring me the horse."
       "I daresay you think that horse is for hire. Well, it isn't. So I fear I shall not
have the honor of lending it to your lordship."
       Matching the man's tone of voice, Jōtarō said, "Then, sir, shall I not have
the pleasure of renting it?"
       "Sassy, aren't you?" cried the man, taking a piece of lighted kindling from
the fire under his oven and throwing it at the boy. The flaming stick missed
Jōtarō, but struck the ancient horse tied under the eaves. With an air-splitting
whinny, she reared, striking her back against a beam.
      "You bastard!" screamed the proprietor. He leapt out of the shop sputtering
      curses and ran up to the animal.
      As he untied the rope and led the horse around to the side yard, Jōtarō
      started in again. "Please lend her to me."
      "I can't."
      "Why not?"
      "I don't have a groom to send with her."
       Now at Jōtarō's side, Otsū suggested that if there was no groom, she could
pay the fee in advance and send the horse back from Minakuchi with a traveler
coming this way. Her appealing manner softened the old man, and he decided he
could trust her. Handing her the rope, he said, "In that case, you can take her to
Minakuchi, or even to Kusatsu if you want. All I ask is that you send her back."
       As they started away, Jōtarō, in high dudgeon, exclaimed, "How do you
like
       that! He treated me like an ass, and then as soon as he saw a pretty face ...
" "You'd better be careful what you say about the old man. His horse is listening.
She may get angry and throw you."
      "Do you think this feeble-jointed old nag can get the best of me?" "You
      don't know how to ride, do you?"
      "Of course I know how to ride."
      "What are you doing, then, trying to climb up from behind?"
      "Well, help me up!"
      "You're a nuisance!" She put her hands under his armpits and lifted him
      onto the animal.

      Jōtarō looked majestically around at the world beneath him. "Please walk
      ahead, Otsū," he said.
      "You're not sitting right."
      "Don't worry. I'm fine."
      "All right, but you're going to be sorry." Taking the rope in one hand, Otsū
       waved good-bye to the proprietor with the other, and the two started off.
Before they had gone a hundred paces, they heard a loud shout coming out
       of the mist behind them, accompanied by the sound of running footsteps.
"Who could that be?" asked Jōtarō.
       "Is he calling us?" wondered Otsū.
       They stopped the horse and looked around. The shadow of a man began to
take form in the white, smoky mist. At first they could make out only contours,
then colors, but the man was soon close enough for them to discern his general
appearance and approximate age. A diabolic aura surrounded his body, as though
he were accompanied by a raging whirlwind. He came rapidly to Otsū's side,
halted and with one swift motion snatched the rope from her hand.
      "Get off!" he commanded, glaring up at Jōtarō.
      The horse skittered backward. Clutching her mane, Jōtarō shouted, "You
      can't do this! I rented this horse, not you!"
      The man snorted, turned to Otsū and said, "You, woman!"
      "Yes?" Otsū said in a low voice.
       "My name's Shishido Baiken. I live in Ujii Village up in the mountains
beyond the barrier. For reasons I won't go into, I'm after a man named Miyamoto
Musashi. He came along this road sometime before daybreak this morning.
Probably passed here hours ago, so I've got to move fast if I'm going to catch
him in Yasugawa, on the Omi border. Let me have your horse." He talked very
rapidly, his ribs heaving in and out. In the cold air, the mist was condensing into
icy flowers on branches and twigs, but his neck glistened like a snakeskin with
sweat.
       Otsū stood very still, her face deathly white, as though the earth beneath
her had drained all the blood from her body. Her lips quivering, she wanted
desperately to ask and make sure that she had heard correctly. She couldn't utter
a word.
      "You said Musashi?" Jōtarō blurted out. He was still clutching the horse's
      mane, but his arms and legs were trembling.
      Baiken was in too much of a hurry to notice their shocked reaction.
      "Come on, now," he ordered. "Off the horse, and be quick about it, or I'll

      give you a thrashing." He brandished the end of the rope like a whip. Jōtarō
      shook his head adamantly. "I won't."
      "What do you mean, you won't?"
      "It's my horse. You can't have it. I don't care how much of a hurry you're in.
      "Watch it! I've been very nice and explained everything, because you're
      only a woman and a child traveling alone, but—"
      "Isn't that right, Otsū?" Jōtarō interrupted. "We don't have to let him have
      the horse, do we?"
       Otsū could have hugged the boy. As far as she was concerned, it was not
so much a question of the horse as it was of preventing this monster from
progressing any faster. "That's true," she said. "I'm sure you're in a hurry, sir, but
so are we. You can hire one of the horses that travel up and down the mountain
regularly. Just as the boy says, it's unfair to try to take our horse away from us."
      "I won't get off," Jōtarō repeated. "I'll die before I do!"
      "You've set your mind on not letting me have the horse?" Baiken asked
      gruffly.
      "You should have known we wouldn't to begin with," replied Jōtarō
      gravely.
      "Son of a bitch!" shouted Baiken, infuriated by the boy's tone.
       Jōtarō, tightening his grip on the horse's mane, looked little bigger than a
flea. Baiken reached up, took hold of his leg and started to pull him off. Now, of
all times, was the moment for Jōtarō to put his wooden sword to use, but in his
confusion he forgot all about the weapon. Faced with an enemy so much
stronger than himself, the only defense that came to mind was to spit in Baiken's
face, which he did, again and again.
       Otsū was filled with grim terror. The fear of being injured, or killed, by
this man brought an acid, dry taste to her mouth. But there was no question of
giving in and letting him have the horse. Musashi was being pursued; the longer
she could delay this fiend, the more time Musashi would have to flee. It didn't
matter to her that the distance between him and herself would also be increased
—just at a time when she knew at least that they were on the same road. Biting
her lip, then screaming, "You can't do this!" she struck Baiken in the chest with a
force that not even she realized she possessed.
       Baiken, still wiping the spit off his face, was thrown off balance, and in
that instant, Otsū's hand caught the hilt of his sword.
       "Bitch!" he barked, grabbing for her wrist. Then he howled with pain, for
the sword was already partly out of its scabbard, and instead of Otsū's arm, he'd

squeezed his hand around the blade. The tips of two fingers on his right hand
dropped to the ground. Holding his bleeding hand, he sprang back,
unintentionally pulling the sword from its scabbard. The brilliant glitter of steel
extending from Otsū's hand scratched across the ground, coming to rest behind
her.
       Baiken had blundered even worse than the night before. Cursing himself
for his lack of caution, he struggled to regain his footing. Otsū, now afraid of
nothing, swung the blade sidewise at him. But it was a great wide-bladed
weapon, nearly three feet long, which not every man would have been able to
handle easily. When Baiken dodged, her hands wobbled, and she staggered
forward. She felt a quick wrenching of her wrists, and reddish-black blood
spurted into her face. After a moment of dizziness, she realized the sword had
cut into the rump of the horse.
       The wound was not deep, but the horse let out a fearsome noise, rearing
and kicking wildly. Baiken, yelling unintelligibly, got hold of Otsū's wrist and
tried to recover his sword, but at that moment the horse kicked them both into
the air. Then, rising on her hind legs, she whinnied loudly and shot off down the
road like an arrow from a bow, Jōtarō clinging grimly to her back and blood
spewing out behind.
       Baiken stumbled around in the dust-laden air. He knew he couldn't catch
the crazed beast, so his enraged eyes turned toward the place where Otsū had
been. She wasn't there.
       After a moment, he spotted his sword at the foot of a larch tree and with a
lunge retrieved it. As he straightened up, something clicked in his mind: there
must be some connection between this woman and Musashi! And if she was
Musashi's friend, she would make excellent bait; at the very least she would
know where he was going.
       Half running, half sliding down the embankment next to the road, he
strode around a thatched farmhouse, peering under the floor and into the
storehouse, while an old woman stooped like a hunchback behind a spinning
wheel inside the house looked on in terror.
       Then he caught sight of Otsū racing through a thick grove of cryptomeria
trees toward the valley beyond, where there were patches of late snow.
       Thundering down the hill with the force of a landslide, he soon closed the
distance between them.
       "Bitch!" he cried, stretching out his left hand and touching her hair.
       Otsū dropped to the ground and caught hold of the roots of a tree, but her

foot slipped and her body fell over the edge of the cliff, where it swayed like a
pendulum. Dirt and pebbles fell into her face as she looked up at Baiken's large
eyes and his gleaming sword.
       "Fool!" he said contemptuously. "Do you think you can get away now?"
       Otsū glanced downward; fifty or sixty feet below, a stream cut through the
floor of the valley. Curiously, she was not afraid, for she saw the valley as her
salvation. At any moment she chose, she could escape simply by letting go of the
tree and throwing herself on the mercy of the open space below. She felt death
was near, but rather than dwell on that, her mind focused on a single image:
Musashi. She seemed to see him now, his face like a full moon in a stormy sky.
       Baiken quickly seized her wrists, and hoisting her up, dragged her well
clear of the edge.
       Just then, one of his henchmen called to him from the road. "What are you
doing down there? We'd better move fast. The old man at the teahouse back there
said a samurai woke him up before dawn this morning, ordered a box lunch, then
ran off toward Kaga Valley."
       "Kaga Valley?"
       "That's what he said. But whether he goes that way or crosses Mount
Tsuchi to Minakuchi doesn't matter. The roads come together at Ishibe. If we
make good time to Yasugawa, we should be able to catch him there."
       Baiken's back was turned to the man, his eyes fastened on Otsū, who
crouched before him, seemingly trapped by his fierce glare. "Ho!" he roared.
"All three of you come down here."
      "Why?"
      "Get down here, fast!"
      "If we waste time, Musashi'll beat us to Yasugawa."
      "Never mind that!"
       The three men were among those who had been engaged in the fruitless
search the night before. Used to making their way through the mountains, they
stormed down the incline with the speed of so many boars. As they reached the
ledge where Baiken was standing, they caught sight of Otsū. Their leader rapidly
explained the situation to them.
       "All right now, tie her up and bring her along," said Baiken, before darting
off through the woods.
       They tied her up, but they couldn't help feeling sorry for her. She lay
helpless on the ground, face turned to the side; they stole embarrassed looks at
her pale profile.

       Baiken was already in Kaga Valley. He stopped, looked back at the cliff
and shouted, "We'll meet in Yasugawa. I'll take a shortcut, but you stay on the
highway. And keep your eyes peeled."
       "Yes, sir!" they chorused back.
       Baiken, running between the rocks like a mountain goat, was soon out of
sight.
       Jōtarō was hurtling down the highroad. Despite her age, the horse was so
maddened there was no stopping her with a mere rope, even if Jōtarō had known
how to go about it. The raw wound burning like a torch, she sped blindly ahead,
up hill, down dale, through villages.
       It was only through sheer luck that Jōtarō avoided being thrown off.
"Watch out! Watch out! Watch out!" he screamed repeatedly. The words had
become a litany.
       No longer able to stay on by clinging to the mane, he had his arms locked
tightly around the horse's neck. His eyes were closed.
       When the beast's rump rose in the air, so did Jōtarō's. As it became
increasingly apparent that his shouts were not working, his pleas gradually gave
way to a distressed wail. When he had begged Otsū to let him ride a horse just
once, he had been thinking how grand it would be to go galloping about at rill on
a splendid steed, but after a few minutes of this hair-raising ride, he had had his
fill.
       Jōtarō hoped that someone—anyone—would bravely volunteer to seize the
flying rope and bring the horse to a halt. In this he was overoptimistic, for
neither travelers nor villagers wanted to risk being hurt in an affair that was no
concern of theirs. Far from helping, everyone made for the safety of the roadside
and shouted abuse at what appeared to them to be an irresponsible horseman.
       In no time he'd passed the village of Mikumo and reached the inn town of
Natsumi. If he had been an expert rider in perfect control of his mount, he could
have shaded his eyes and calmly looked out over the beautiful mountains and
valleys of Iga—the peaks of Nunobiki, the Yokota River and, in the distance, the
mirror-like waters of Lake Biwa.
       "Stop! Stop! Stop!" The words of his litany had changed; his tone was
more distraught. As they started down Kōji Hill, his cry abruptly changed again.
"Help!" he screamed.
       The horse charged on down the precipitous incline, Jōtarō bouncing like a
ball on her back.
       About a third of the way down, a large oak projected from a cliff on the

left, one of its smaller branches extending across the road. When Jōtarō felt the
leaves against his face, he grabbed with both hands, believing the gods had heard
his prayer and caused the limb to stretch out before him. Perhaps he was right;
he jumped like a frog, and the next instant he was hanging in the air, his hands
firmly wrapped around the branch above his head. The horse went out from
under him, moving a little faster now that she was rider-less.
       It was no more than a ten-foot drop to the ground, but Jōtarō could not
bring himself to release his grip. In his badly shaken condition, he saw the short
distance to the ground as a yawning abyss and hung onto the branch for dear life,
crossing his legs over it, readjusting his aching hands, and wondering feverishly
what to do. The problem was solved for him when with a loud crack the branch
broke off. For an awful instant, Jōtarō thought he was done for; a second later he
was sitting on the ground unharmed.
      "Whew!" was all he could say.
      For a few minutes he sat inertly, his spirit dampened, if not broken, but then
      he remembered why he was there and jumped up.
      Heedless of the ground he had covered, he shouted, "Otsū!"
       He ran back up the slope, one hand firmly around his wooden sword.
"What could have happened to her? ... Otsū! O-tsū-ū-ū!"
       Presently he met a man in a grayish-red kimono coming down the hill. The
stranger wore a leather hakama and carried two swords, but had on no cloak.
After passing Jōtarō, he looked over his shoulder and said, "Hello, there!" Jōtarō
turned, and the man asked, "Is something wrong?"
      "You came from over the hill, didn't you?" Jōtarō asked.
      "Yes."
      "Did you see a pretty woman about twenty years old?"
      "I did, as a matter of fact."
      "Where?"
       "In Natsumi I saw some freebooters walking along with a girl. Her arms
were tied behind her, which naturally struck me as strange, but I had no reason to
interfere. I daresay the men were from Tsujikaze Kōhei's gang. He moved a
whole villageful of hoodlums from Yasugawa to Suzuka Valley some years ago."
      "That was her, I'm sure." Jōtarō started to walk on, but the man stopped
      him.
      "Were you traveling together?" he asked.
      "Yes. Her name's Otsū."
       "If you take foolish risks you'll get yourself killed before you can help

anybody. Why don't you wait here? They'll come this way sooner or later. For
now, tell me what this is all about. I may be able to give you some advice."
       The boy immediately placed his trust in the man and told him everything
that had happened since morning. From time to time, the man nodded under his
basket hat. When the story ended, he said, "I understand your predicament, but
even with your courage, a woman and a boy are no match for Kōhei's men. I
think I'd better rescue Otsū—is that her name?—for you."
       "Would they hand her over to you?"
       "Maybe not for the mere asking, but I'll think about that when the time
comes. Meanwhile, you hide in a thicket and stay quiet."
       While Jōtarō selected a clump of bushes and hid behind it, the man
continued briskly on down the hill. For a moment, Jōtarō wondered if he had
been deceived. Had the rōnin just said a few words to cheer him up, then moved
on to save his own neck? Seized by anxiety, he lifted his head above the shrubs,
but hearing voices, ducked down again.
       A minute or two later Otsū came into view, surrounded by the three men,
her hands tied firmly behind her. Blood was encrusted on a cut on her white foot.
      One of the ruffians, shoving Otsū forward by the shoulder, growled, "What
      are you looking around for? Walk faster!"
      "That's right, walk!"
      "I'm looking for my traveling companion. What could have happened to
      him? ... Jōtarō!"
      "Quiet!"
       Jōtarō was all set to yell and jump out of his hiding place when the rōnin
came back, this time without his basket hat. He was twenty-six or -seven and of
a darkish complexion. In his eyes was a purposeful look that strayed neither right
nor left. As he trotted up the incline, he was saying, as if to himself, "It's
terrifying, really terrifying!"
       When he passed Otsū and her captors, he mumbled a greeting and
hastened on, but the men stopped. "Hey," one of them called. "Aren't you
Watanabe's nephew? What's so terrifying?"
       Watanabe was the name of an old family in the district, the present head of
which was Watanabe Hanzō, a highly respected practitioner of the occult martial
tactics known collectively as ninjutsu.
       "Haven't you heard?"
       "Heard what?"
       "Down at the bottom of this hill there's a samurai named Miyamoto

Musashi, all ready for a big fight. He's standing in the middle of the road with
his sword unsheathed, questioning everybody who passes by. He has the fiercest
eyes I ever saw."
       "Musashi's doing that?"
       "That's right. He came straight up to me and asked my name, so I told him
that I was Tsuge Sannojō, the nephew of Watanabe Hanzō, and that I came from
Iga. He apologized and let me by. He was very polite, in fact, said as long as I
wasn't connected with Tsujikaze Kōhei, it was all right."
       "Oh?"
       "I asked him what had happened. He said Kōhei was on the road with his
henchmen, out to catch him and kill him. He decided to entrench himself where
he was and meet the attack there. He seemed prepared to fight to the finish."
      "Are you telling the truth, Sannojō?"
      "Of course I am. Why would I lie to you?"
      The faces of the three grew pale. They looked at each other nervously,
      uncertain as to their next move.
      "You'd better be careful," said Sannojō, ostensibly resuming his trip up the
      hill.
      "Sannojō!"
      "What?"
      "I don't know what we should do. Even our boss said this Musashi is
      unusually strong."
       "Well, he does seem to have a lot of confidence in himself. When he came
up to me with that sword, I certainly didn't feel like taking him on."
      "What do you think we should do? We're taking this woman to Yasugawa
      on the boss's orders."
      "I don't see that that has anything to do with me."
      "Don't be like that. Lend us a hand."
       "Not on your life! If I helped you and my uncle found out about it, he'd
disown me. I could, of course, give you a bit of advice."
      "Well, speak up! What do you think we should do?"
      "Um ... For one thing, you could tie that woman up to a tree and leave her.
      That way, you could move faster."
      "Anything else?"
       "You shouldn't take this road. It's a little farther, but you could go up the
valley road to Yasugawa and let people there know about all this. Then you
could surround Musashi and gradually hem him in."

      "That's not a bad idea."
      "But be very, very careful. Musashi will be fighting for his life, and he'll
take quite a few souls with him when he goes. You'd rather avoid that, wouldn't
you?"
      Quickly agreeing with Sannojō's suggestion, they dragged Otsū to a grove
and tied her rope to a tree. Then they left but after a few minutes returned to tie a
gag in her mouth.
      "That should do it," said one.
      "Let's get going."
      They dived into the woods. Jōtarō, squatting behind his leafy screen,
waited judiciously before raising his head for a look around. He saw no one—no
travelers, no freebooters, no Sannojō.
      "Otsu!" he called, prancing out of the thicket. Quickly finding her, he
undid her bonds and took her hand. They ran to the road. "Let's get away from
here!" he urged.
     "What were you doing hiding in the bushes?"
     "Never mind! Let's go!"
     "Just a minute," said Otsū, stopping to pat her hair, straighten her collar and
     rearrange her obi.
     Jōtarō clicked his tongue. "This is no time for primping," he wailed. "Can't
     you fix your hair later?"
     "But that rōnin said Musashi was at the bottom of the hill."
     "Is that why you have to stop and make yourself pretty?"
      "No, of course not," said Otsū, defending herself with almost comic
seriousness. "But if Musashi is so near, we don't have anything to worry about.
And since our troubles are as good as over, I feel calm and safe enough to think
of my appearance.
     "Do you believe that rōnin really saw Musashi?"
     "Of course. By the way, where is he?"
     "He just disappeared. He's sort of strange, isn't he?"
     "Shall we go now?" said Otsū.
     "Sure you're pretty enough?"
     "Jōtarō!"
     "Just teasing. You look so happy."
     "You look happy too."
      "I am, and I don't try to hide it the way you do. I'll shout it so everybody
can hear: I'm happy!" He did a little dance, waving his arms and kicking his legs,

then said, "It'll be very disappointing if Musashi isn't there, won't it? I think I'll
run on ahead and see."
       Otsū took her time. Her heart had already flown to the bottom of the slope
faster than Jōtarō could ever have run.
       "I look frightful," she thought as she surveyed her injured foot and the dirt
and leaves stuck to her sleeves.
       "Come on!" called Jōtarō. "Why are you poking along?" From the lilt in
his voice, Otsū felt certain that he had spotted Musashi.
       "At last," she thought. Until now she'd had to seek comfort within herself,
and she was tired of it. She felt a measure of pride, both in herself and toward
the gods, for having remained true to her purpose. Now that she was about to see
Musashi again, her spirit was dancing with joy. This elation, she knew, was that
of anticipation; she could not predict whether Musashi would accept her
devotion. Her joy at the prospect of meeting him was only slightly tarnished by a
gnawing premonition that the encounter might bring sadness.
       On the shady slope of Kōji Hill, the ground was frozen, but at the tea shop
near the bottom, it was so warm flies were flying around. This was an inn town,
so of course the shop sold tea to travelers; it also carried a line of miscellaneous
goods required by the farmers of the district, from cheap sweets to straw boots
for oxen. Jōtarō stood in front of the shop, a small boy in a large and noisy
crowd.
     "Where's Musashi?" She looked around searchingly.
     "He's not here," replied Jōtarō dispiritedly.
     "Not here? He must be!"
       "Well, I can't find him anywhere, and the shopkeeper said he hasn't seen a
samurai like that around. There must have been some mistake." Jōtarō, though
disappointed, was not despondent.
       Otsū would have readily admitted that she had had no reason on earth to
expect as much as she had, but the nonchalance of Jōtarō's reply annoyed her.
Shocked and a little angry at his lack of concern, she said, "Did you look for him
over there?"
     "Yes."
     "How about behind the Kōshin milepost?"
     "I looked. He's not there."
     "Behind the tea shop?"
     "I told you, he isn't here!" Otsū turned her face away from him. "Are you
     crying?" he asked.

      "It's none of your business," she said sharply.
       "I don't understand you. You seem to be sensible most of the time, but
sometimes you act like a baby. How could we know if Sannojō's story was true
or not? You decided all by yourself that it was, and now that you find it wasn't,
you burst into tears. Women are crazy," Jōtarō exclaimed, bursting into laughter.
       Otsū felt like sitting down right there and giving up. In an instant, the light
had gone out of her life; she felt as bereft of hope as before—no, more so. The
decaying milk teeth in Jōtarō's laughing mouth disgusted her. Angrily she asked
herself why she had to drag a child like this around with her anyway. The urge
swept over her to abandon him right there.
       True, he was also searching for Musashi, but he loved him only as a
teacher. To her, Musashi was life itself. Jōtarō could laugh everything off and
return to his normal cheerful self in no time, but Otsū would for days be
deprived of the energy to go on. Somewhere in Jōtarō's youthful mind, there was
the blithe certainty that one day, sooner or later, he'd find Musashi again. Otsū
had no such belief in a happy ending. Having been too optimistic about seeing
Musashi today, she was now swinging toward the opposite extreme, asking
herself if life would go on like this forever, without her ever again seeing or
talking to the man she loved.
       Those who love seek a philosophy and, because of this, are fond of
solitude. In Otsū's case, orphan that she was, there was also the keen sense of
isolation from others. In response to Jōtarō's indifference, she frowned and
marched silently away from the tea shop.
       "Otsū!" The voice was Sannojō's. He emerged from behind the Kōshin
milepost and came toward her through the withered underbrush. His scabbards
were damp.
      "You weren't telling the truth," Jōtarō said accusingly.
      "What do you mean?"
      "You said Musashi was waiting at the bottom of the hill. You lied!"
       "Don't be stupid!" said Sannojō reproachfully. "It was because of that lie
that Otsū was able to escape, wasn't it? What are you complaining about?
Shouldn't you be thanking me?"
      "You just made up that story to fool those men?"
      "Of course."
      Turning triumphantly to Otsū, Jōtarō said, "See? Didn't I tell you?"
       Otsū felt she had a perfect right to be angry with Jōtarō, but there was no
reason to nurse a grudge against Sannojō. She bowed to him several times and

thanked him profusely for having saved her.
       "Those hoodlums from Suzuka are a lot tamer than they used to be," said
Sannojō, "but if they're out to waylay somebody, he's not likely to get over this
road safely. Still, from what I hear about this Musashi you're so worried about, it
sounds to me like he's too smart to stumble into one of their traps."
       "Are there other roads besides this one to Omi?" asked Otsū.
       "There are," replied Sannojō, raising his eyes toward the mountain peaks
sparkling dazzlingly in the midday sun. "If you go to Iga Valley, there's a road to
Ueno, and from Ano Valley there's one that goes to Yokkaichi and Kuwana.
There must be three or four other mountain paths and shortcuts. My guess is,
Musashi left the highroad early on."
       "Then you think he's still safe?"
       "Most likely. At least, safer than the two of you. You've been rescued once
today, but if you stay on this highway, Tsujikaze's men will catch you again at
Yasugawa. If you can stand a rather steep climb, come with me, and I'll show
you a path practically nobody knows."
       They quickly assented. Sannojō guided them up above Kaga Village to
Makado Pass, from which a path led down to Seto in Otsu.
       After explaining in detail how to proceed, he said, "You're out of harm's
way now. Just keep your eyes and ears open, and be sure to find a safe place to
stay before dark."
       Otsū thanked him for all he had done and started to leave, but Sannojō
stared at her and said, "We're parting now, you know." The words seemed
fraught with meaning, and there was a rather hurt look in his eyes. "All along,"
he continued, "I've been thinking, 'Is she going to ask now?' but you never did
ask."
      "Ask what?"
      "My name."
      "But I heard your name when we were on Kōji Hill."
      "Do you remember it?"
      "Of course. You're Tsuge Sannojō, and you're the nephew of Watanabe
      Hanzō."
       "Thank you. I don't ask you to be eternally grateful to me or anything like
that, but I do hope you'll always remember me."
       "Why, I'm deeply indebted to you."
       "That's not what I mean. What I want to say is, well, I'm still not married.
If my uncle weren't so strict, I'd like to take you to my home right now.... But I

can see you're in a hurry. Anyway, you'll find a small inn a few miles ahead
where you can stay overnight. I know the innkeeper very well, so mention my
name to him. Farewell!"
       After he was gone, a strange feeling came over Otsū. From the outset, she
had not been able to figure out what sort of person Sannojō was, and when they
had parted, she felt as though she had escaped from the clutches of a dangerous
animal. She had gone through the motions of thanking him; she did not really
feel grateful in her heart.
       Jōtarō, in spite of his tendency to take to strangers, reacted in much the
same way. As they started down from the pass, he said, "I don't like that man."
       Otsū did not want to speak badly of Sannojō behind his back, but she
admitted she did not like him either, adding, "What do you suppose he meant by
telling me that he was still single."
       "Oh, he's hinting that one day he's going to ask you to marry him." "Why,
that's absurd!"


       The two made their way to Kyoto without incident, albeit disappointed at
not finding Musashi at any of the places where they had hoped to—neither on
the lakeside in Omi nor at the Kara Bridge in Seta nor at the barrier in Osaka.
From Keage, they plunged into the year-end crowds near the Sanjō Avenue
entrance to the city. In the capital, the house fronts were adorned with the pine-
branch decorations traditional during the New Year's season. The sight of the
decorations cheered Otsū, who, instead of lamenting the lost chances of the past,
resolved to look forward to the future and the opportunities it held for finding
Musashi. The Great Bridge at Gojō Avenue. The first day of the New Year. If he
did not show up that morning, then the second, or the third ... He had said he
would certainly be there, as she had learned from Jōtarō. Even though he wasn't
coming to meet her, just to be able to see him and talk to him again would be
enough.
       The possibility that she might run into Matahachi was the darkest cloud
shadowing her dream. According to Jōtarō, Musashi's message had been
delivered only to Akemi; Matahachi might never have received it. Otsū prayed
that he hadn't, that Musashi would come, but not Matahachi.
       Otsū slowed her steps, thinking Musashi might be in the very crowd they
were in. Then a chill ran up her spine and she started walking faster. Matahachi's
dreadful mother might also materialize at any moment.

       Jōtarō hadn't a care in the world. The colors and noises of the city, seen
and heard after a long absence, exhilarated him no end. "Are we going straight to
an inn?" he asked apprehensively.
       "No, not yet."
       "Good! It'd be dull being indoors while it's still light out. Let's walk around
some more. It looks like there's a market over there."
      "We haven't time to go to the market. We have important business to take
      care of."
      "Business? We do?"
      "Have you forgotten the box you're carrying on your back?"
      "Oh, that."
       "Yes, that. I won't be able to relax until we've found Lord Karasumaru
Mitsuhiro's mansion and delivered the scrolls to him."
       "Are we going to stay at his house tonight?"
       "Of course not." Otsū laughed, glancing toward the Kamo River. "Do you
think a great nobleman like that would let a dirty little boy like you sleep under
his roof, lice and all?"
