A Hero’s Passing


       "Uncle Gon!"
       "What?"
       "Are you tired?"
       "Yes, a little."
        "I thought so. I'm about walked out myself. But this shrine has splendid
buildings, doesn't it? Say, isn't that the orange tree they call the secret tree of
Wakamiya Hachiman?"
        "Seems to be."
        "It's supposed to be the first item in the eighty shiploads of tribute
presented by the King of Silla to Empress Jingū when she conquered Korea."
       "Look over there in the Stable of the Sacred Horses! Isn't that a fine
       animal?
       It'd certainly come in first at the annual horse race in Kamo."
       "You mean the white one?"
       "Yes. Hmm, what does that signboard say?"
        "It says if you boil the beans used in the horse fodder and drink the juice,
it'll keep you from crying or gritting your teeth at night. Do you want some?"
       Uncle Gon laughed. "Don't be silly!" Turning around, he asked, "What
       happened to Matahachi?"
       "He seems to have wandered off."
       "Oh, there he is, resting by the stage for the sacred dances."
        The old lady lifted her hand and called to her son. "If we go over that way,
we can see the original Great Torii, but let's go to the High Lantern first."
        Matahachi followed along lazily. Ever since his mother had collared him in
Osaka, he'd been with them—walking, walking, walking. His patience was
beginning to wear thin. Five or ten days of sightseeing might be all well and
good, but he dreaded the thought of accompanying them to take their revenge.
He had tried to persuade them that traveling together was a poor way to go about
it, that it would be better for him to go and look for Musashi on his own. His
mother wouldn't hear of it.
        "It'll be New Year's soon," she pointed out. "And I want you to spend it
with me. We haven't been together to celebrate the New Year holiday for a long

time, and this may be our last chance."
        Though Matahachi knew he couldn't refuse her, he had made up his mind
to leave them a couple of days after the first of the year. Osugi and Uncle Gon,
possibly fearing they hadn't long to live, had become so wrapped up in religion
they stopped at every shrine or temple possible, leaving offerings and making
long supplications to the gods and Buddhas. They had spent nearly all of the
present day at Sumiyoshi Shrine.
        Matahachi, bored stiff, was dragging his feet and pouting.
        "Can't you walk faster?" Osugi asked in a testy voice.
        Matahachi's pace did not change. Fully as annoyed with his mother as she
was with him, he grumbled, "You hurry me along and make me wait! Hurry and
wait, hurry and wait!"
        "What am I to do with a son like you? When people come to a sacred
place, it's only proper to stop and pray to the gods. I've never seen you bow
before either a god or a Buddha, and mark my words, you'll live to regret it.
Besides, if you prayed with us, you wouldn't have to wait so long."
        "What a nuisance!" growled Matahachi.
        "Who's a nuisance?" cried Osugi indignantly.
        For the first two or three days everything had been as sweet as honey
between them, but once Matahachi had got used to his mother again, he began to
take exception to everything she did and said and to make fun of her every
chance he got. When night came and they returned to the inn, she would make
him sit down in front of her and give him a sermon, which served to put him in
worse humor than before.
        "What a pair!" Uncle Con lamented to himself, trying to figure out a way
to soothe the old woman's pique and restore a measure of calmness to his
nephew's scowling face. Sensing yet another sermon in the making, he moved to
head it off. "Oh," he called cheerily. "I thought I smelled something good!
They're selling broiled clams at that teahouse over by the beach. Let's stop in and
have some."
        Neither mother nor son displayed much enthusiasm, but Uncle Gon
managed to steer them to the seaside shop, which was sheltered with thin reed
blinds. While the other two got comfortable on a bench outside, he went in and
came back with some sake.
        Offering a cup to Osugi, he said amiably, "This will cheer Matahachi up a
little. Maybe you're being a little hard on him."
        Osugi looked away and snapped, "I don't want anything to drink."

       Uncle Gon, caught in his own web, offered the cup to Matahachi, who,
though still grumpy, proceeded to empty three jars as fast as he could, knowing
full well this would make his mother livid. When he asked Uncle Gon for a
fourth, Osugi had had all she could take.
       "You've had enough!" she scolded. "This isn't a picnic, and we didn't come
here to get drunk! And you watch yourself too, Uncle Gon! You're older than
Matahachi, and should know better."
       Uncle Gon, as mortified as if only he had been drinking, tried to hide his
face by rubbing his hands over it. "Yes, you're quite right," he said meekly. He
got up and ambled off a few paces.
       Then it began in earnest, for Matahachi had struck at the roots of Osugi's
violent though brittle sense of maternal love and anxiety, and it was out of the
question for her to wait until they returned to the inn. She lashed out furiously at
him, not caring whether other people were listening. Matahachi stared at her
with a look of sullen disobedience until she finished.
       "All right," he said. "I take it you've made up your mind that I'm an
ungrateful lout with no self-respect. Right?"
       "Yes! What have you done up till now that shows any pride or self-
respect?" "Well, I'm not as worthless as you seem to think, but then you wouldn't
have any way of knowing that."
       "Oh, I wouldn't, would I? Well, nobody knows a child better than his
parents, and I think the day you were born was a bad day for the House of
Hon'iden!"
       "You just wait and see! I'm still young. One day when you're dead and
buried, you'll be sorry you said that."
       "Ha! I wish that were so, but I doubt that would happen in a hundred years.
It's so sad, when you think of it."
       "Well, if it makes you so terribly sad to have a son like me, there's not
much use in my hanging around any longer. I'm leaving!" Steaming with rage, he
stood up and walked away in long, determined strides.
       Taken by surprise, the old woman tried in a pitifully trembling voice to call
him back. Matahachi paid no heed. Uncle Gon, who could have run and tried to
stop him, stood looking intently toward the sea, his mind apparently occupied
with other thoughts.
       Osugi got up, then sat back down again. "Don't try to stop him," she said
needlessly to Uncle Gon. "It's no use."
       Uncle Gon turned toward her, but instead of answering, said, "That girl out

there is acting very funny. Wait here a minute!" Almost before the words were
out, he had chucked his hat under the eaves of the shop and headed like an arrow
toward the water.
       "Idiot!" cried Osugi. "Where are you going? Matahachi's—"
       She chased after him, but about twenty yards from the shop, snagged her
foot in a clump of seaweed and fell flat on her face. Mumbling angrily, she
picked herself up, her face and shoulders covered with sand. When she caught
sight of Uncle Gon again, her eyes opened like mirrors.
       "You old fool! Where are you going? Have you lost your mind?" she
screamed.
       So excited that she looked as if she might be mad herself, she ran as fast as
she could, following Uncle Gon's footsteps. But she was too late. Uncle Gon was
already in up to his knees and pushing out farther.
       Enveloped in the white spray, he seemed almost in a trance. Still farther
out was a young girl, feverishly making her way toward deep water. When he
had first spotted her, she had been standing in the shadow of the pines, looking
blankly at the sea; then suddenly she sped across the sand and into the water, her
black hair streaming out behind her. The water was now halfway up to her waist,
and she was rapidly approaching the point where the bottom fell off sharply.
       As he neared her, Uncle Gon called out frantically, but she pressed on.
Suddenly, with an odd sound, her body disappeared, leaving a swirl on the
surface.
       "Crazy child!" cried Uncle Gon. "Are you determined to kill yourself?"
Then he himself sank below the surface with a glug.
       Osugi was running back and forth along the edge of the water. When she
saw the two go down, her screaming turned to strident calls for help.
       Waving her hands, running, stumbling, she ordered the people on the
beach to the rescue as though they were the cause of the accident. "Save them,
you idiots! Hurry, or they'll drown."
      Minutes later, some fishermen brought the bodies in and laid them on the
      sand.
      "A love suicide?" asked one.
      "Are you joking?" said another, laughing.
       Uncle Gon had caught hold of the girl's obi and was still holding it, but
neither he nor she was breathing. The girl presented a strange appearance, for
though her hair was matted and messy, her powder and lipstick had not washed
away, and she looked as if she were alive. Even with her teeth still biting her

lower lip, her purple mouth bore the suggestion of a laugh.
       "I've seen her before somewhere," somebody said.
       "Isn't she the girl who was looking for shells on the beach a while ago?"
"Yes, that's right! She was staying at the inn over there."
       From the direction of the inn, four or five men were already approaching,
       among them Seijūrō, who breathlessly pushed his way through the crowd.
"Akemi!" he cried. His face went pale, but he stood perfectly still.
      "Is she a friend of yours?" asked one of the fishermen.
      "Y-y-yes."
      "You'd better try and get the water out of her fast!"
      "Can we save her?"
      "Not if you just stand there gaping!"
       The fishermen loosened Uncle Gon's grip, laid the bodies side by side, and
began slapping them on the back and pressing them in the abdomen. Akemi
regained her breathing fairly rapidly, and Seijūrō, eager to escape the stares of
the bystanders, had the men from the inn carry her back.
       "Uncle Gon! Uncle Gon!" Osugi had her mouth to the old man's ear and
was calling to him through her tears. Akemi had come back to life because she
was young, but Uncle Gon ... Not only was he old, but he had had a fair amount
of sake in him when he went to the rescue. His breath was stilled forever; no
amount of urging on Osugi's part would open his eyes again.
       The fishermen, giving up, said, "The old man's gone."
       Osugi stopped crying long enough to turn on them as though they were
enemies rather than people trying to help. "What do you mean? Why should he
die when that young girl was saved?" Her attitude suggested she was ready to
attack them physically. She pushed the men aside and said firmly, "I'll bring him
back to life myself! I'll show you."
       She set to work on Uncle Gon, putting to use every method she could think
of. Her determination brought tears to the eyes of the onlookers, a few of whom
stayed to help her. Far from being appreciative, however, she ordered them
around like hired help—complained that they were not pressing the right way,
told them that what they were doing would not work, ordered them to build a
fire, sent them off for medicine. Everything she did, she did in the surliest
fashion imaginable.
       To the men on the shore, she was neither a relative nor a friend but just a
stranger, and eventually even the most sympathetic became angry.
       "Who is this old hag anyway?" growled one.

      "Humph! Can't tell the difference between somebody who's unconscious
and somebody who's dead. If she can bring him back, let her do it."
      Before long, Osugi found herself alone with the body. In the gathering
darkness, mist rose from the sea, and all that remained of the day was a strip of
orange clouds near the horizon. Building a fire and sitting down beside it, she
held Uncle Gon's body close to her.
      "Uncle Gon. Oh, Uncle Gon!" she wailed.
      The waves darkened. She tried and tried to bring warmth back to his body.
The look on her face said that she expected him at any minute to open his mouth
and speak to her. She chewed up pills from the medicine box in his obi and
transferred them to his mouth. She held him close and rocked him.
      "Open your eyes, Uncle Gon!" she pleaded. "Say something! You can't go
away and leave me alone. We still haven't killed Musashi or punished that hussy
Otsū."


       Inside the inn, Akemi lay in a fretful sleep. When Seijūrō attempted to
adjust her feverish head on the pillow, she mumbled deliriously. For a time, he
sat by her side in utter stillness, his face paler than hers. As he observed the
agony he himself had heaped on her, he suffered too.
       It was he himself who by animal force had preyed on her and satisfied his
own lust. Now he sat gravely and stiffly beside her, worrying about her pulse and
her breathing, praying that the life that had for a time left her would be safely
restored. In one short day, he had been both a beast and a man of compassion.
But to Seijūrō, given as he was to extremes, his conduct didn't seem inconsistent.
       His eyes were sad, the set of his mouth humble. He stared at her and
murmured, "Try to be calm, Akemi. It's not just me; most other men are the same
way.... You'll soon come to understand, though you must have been shocked by
the violence of my love." Whether this speech was actually directed toward the
girl or was intended to quiet his own spirit would have been difficult to judge,
but he kept voicing the same sentiment over and over.
       The gloom in the room was like ink. The paper-covered shoji muffled the
sound of the wind and waves.
       Akemi stirred and her white arms slipped out from under the covers. When
Seijūrō tried to replace the quilt, she mumbled, "Wh-what's the date?" "What?"
       "How ... how many days ... till New Year's?"
       "It's only seven days now. You'll be well by then, and we'll be back in

Kyoto." He lowered his face toward hers, but she pushed it away with the palm
of her hand.
      "Stop! Go away! I don't like you."
      He drew back, but the half-crazed words poured from her lips.
      "Fool! Beast!"
      Seijūrō remained silent.
      "You're a beast. I don't ... I don't want to look at you."
      "Forgive me, Akemi, please!"
       "Go away! Don't talk to me." Her hand waved nervously in the dark.
Seijūrō swallowed sadly but continued to stare at her.
       "What . .. what's the date?"
       This time he did not answer.
       "Isn't it New Year's yet? ... Between New Year's and the seventh ... Every
day ... He said he'd be on the bridge.... The message from Musashi ... every day
... Gojō Avenue bridge ... It's so long till New Year's.... I must go back to
Kyoto.... If I go to the bridge, he'll be there."
      "Musashi?" said Seijūrō in wonderment.
      The delirious girl was silent.
      "This Musashi ... Miyamoto Musashi?"
      Seijūrō peered into her face, but Akemi said no more. Her blue eyelids were
      closed; she was fast asleep.
       Dried pine needles tapped against the shoji. A horse whinnied. A light
appeared beyond the partition, and a maid's voice said, "The Young Master is in
here."
       Seijūrō hastily went into the adjoining room, carefully shutting the door
behind him. "Who is it?" he asked. "I'm in here."
       "Ueda Ryōhei," came the answer. Clad in full travel garb and covered with
dust, Ryōhei came in and sat down.
       While they exchanged greetings, Seijūrō wondered what could have
brought him here. Since Ryōhei, like Tōji, was one of the senior students and
was needed at home, Seijūrō would never have brought him on a spur-of-the-
moment excursion.
      "Why have you come? Has something happened in my absence?" asked
      Seijūrō.
      "Yes, and I must ask you to return immediately."
      "What is it?"
       As Ryōhei put both hands into his kimono and felt around, Akemi's voice

came from the next room. "I don't like you! ... Beast! ... Go away!" The clearly
spoken words were filled with fear; anyone would have thought she was awake
and in real danger.
      Startled, Ryōhei asked, "Who's that?"
      "Oh, that? Akemi took sick after she got here. She's feverish. Every once in
      a while she gets a little delirious."
      "That's Akemi?"
      "Yes, but never mind. I want to hear why you came."
       From the stomach wrapper under his kimono, Ryōhei finally extracted a
letter and presented it to Seijūrō. "It's this," he said without further explanation,
then moved the lamp the maid had left over to Seijūrō's side.
      "Hmm. It's from Miyamoto Musashi."
      "Yes!" said Ryōhei with force.
      "Have you opened it?"
      "Yes. I talked it over with the others, and we decided it might be important,
      so we opened and read it."
       Instead of seeing for himself what was in the letter, Seijūrō asked,
somewhat hesitantly, "What does it say?" Though nobody had dared mention the
subject to him, Musashi had remained in the back of Seijūrō's mind. Even so, he
had nearly convinced himself he'd never run into the man again. The sudden
arrival of the letter right after Akemi had spoken Musashi's name sent chills up
and down his spine.
       Ryōhei bit his lip angrily. "It's finally come. When he went away talking so
big last spring, I was sure he'd never set foot in Kyoto again, but—can you
imagine the conceit? Go on, look at it! It's a challenge, and he has the gall to
address it to the entire House of Yoshioka, signing it with only his own name. He
thinks he can take us all on himself!"
       Musashi hadn't written any return address, nor was there any clue to his
whereabouts in the letter. But he had not forgotten the promise he had written to
Seijūrō and his disciples, and with this second letter the die was cast. He was
declaring war on the House of Yoshioka; the battle would have to be fought, and
it would be a fight to the finish—one in which samurai struggle to the death to
preserve their honor and vindicate their skill with the sword. Musashi was laying
his life on the line and challenging the Yoshioka School to do the same. When
the time came, words and clever technical ploys would count for little.
       That Seijūrō still did not grasp this fact was the greatest source of danger
to him. He did not see that the day of reckoning was at hand, that this was no

time to be idling away his days on empty pleasures.
       When the letter had arrived in Kyoto, some of the stauncher disciples,
disgusted with the Young Master's undisciplined way of life, had grumbled
angrily over his absence at so crucial a moment. Riled by the insult from this
lone rōnin, they lamented that Kempō was no longer alive. After much
discussion, they had agreed to inform Seijūrō of the situation and make sure he
returned to Kyoto immediately. Yet now that the letter had been delivered,
Seijūrō merely put it on his knees and made no move to open it.
       With obvious irritation, Ryōhei asked, "Don't you think you ought to read
it?"
       "What? Oh, this?" said Seijūrō vacantly. He unrolled the letter and read it.
His fingers began to tremble beyond his control, an unsteadiness caused not by
the strong language and tone of Musashi's challenge but by his own feeling of
weakness and vulnerability. Akemi's harsh words of rejection had already
destroyed his composure and upset his pride as a samurai. He had never before
felt so powerless.
       Musashi's message was simple and straightforward:


       Have you been in good health since I last wrote? In accordance with my
previous promise, I am writing to ask where, on what day and at what hour we
will meet. I have no particular preference and am willing to hold our promised
match at the time and place designated by you. I request that you post a sign by
the bridge at Gojō Avenue giving me your reply sometime before the seventh day
of the New Year.
       I trust that you have been polishing your swordsmanship as usual. I myself
feel that I have improved to a certain small extent.
       Shimmen Miyamoto Musashi.


      Seijūrō stuffed the letter into his kimono and stood up. "I'll return to Kyoto
now," he said.
      This was said less out of resolution than because his emotions were so
tangled he couldn't bear to remain where he was a moment longer. He had to get
away and put the whole dreadful day behind him as soon as possible.
      With much commotion, the innkeeper was called and requested to take
care of Akemi, a task he accepted only with reluctance, despite the money

Seijūrō pressed on him.
      "I'll use your horse," he said summarily to Ryōhei. Like a fleeing bandit,
he jumped into the saddle and rode rapidly away through the dark rows of trees,
leaving Ryōhei to follow along at a dead run.
