The Mayfly in Winter


       Every morning after finishing their shrine duties, the maidens living in the
House of Virgins went, books in hand, to the schoolroom at the Arakida house,
where they studied grammar and practiced writing poems. For their
performances of religious dances, they dressed in white silk kimono with
crimson widely flared trousers, called hakama, but now they had on the short-
sleeved kimono and white cotton hakama they wore while studying or doing
household chores.
       A group of them was streaming out the back door when one exclaimed,
"What's that?" She was pointing to the pack with the swords tied to it, hung up
there by Musashi the night before.
     "Whose do you think it is?"
     "It must be a samurai's."
     "Isn't that obvious?"
     "No, it could have been left here by a thief."
       They looked wide-eyed at each other and gulped, as though they had come
across the robber himself—leather bandannaed and taking his noonday nap.
       "Perhaps we should tell Otsū about it," one of them suggested, and by
common consent they all ran back to the dormitory and called up from beneath
the railing outside Otsū's room.
       "Sensei! Sensei! There's something strange down here. Come and look!"
     Otsū put her writing brush down on her desk and stuck her head out the
     window. "What is it?" she asked.
     "A thief left his swords and a bundle behind. They're over there, hanging on
     the back wall."
     "Really? You'd better take them over to the Arakida house."
     "Oh, we can't! We're afraid to touch them."
     "Aren't you making a big fuss over nothing? Run along to your lessons
     now, and don't waste any more time."
       By the time Otsū came down from her room, the girls had gone. The only
people in the dormitory were the old woman who did the cooking and one of the
maidens who had taken ill. "Whose things are those hanging up here?" Otsū
asked the cook.

       The woman did not know, of course.
       "I'll take them over to the Arakida house," Otsū said. When she took the
pack and swords down, she nearly dropped them, they were so heavy. Lugging
them with both hands, she wondered how men could walk about carrying so
much weight.
       Otsū and Jōtarō had come here two months earlier, after traveling up and
down the Iga, Omi and Mino highroads in search of Musashi. Upon their arrival
in Ise, they had decided to settle down for the winter, since it would be difficult
to make their way through the mountains in the snow. At first Otsū had given
flute lessons in the Toba district, but then she had come to the attention of the
head of the Arakida family, who, being the official ritualist, ranked second only
to the chief priest.
       When Arakida asked Otsū to come to the shrine to teach the maidens, she
had consented, not so much out of a desire to teach as out of her interest in
learning the ancient, sacred music. Then, too, the peacefulness of the shrine's
forest had appealed to her, as had the idea of living for a while with the shrine
maidens, the youngest of whom was thirteen or fourteen, and the oldest around
twenty.
       Jōtarō had stood in the way of her taking the position, for it was forbidden
to have a male, even of his age, living in the same dormitory as the maidens. The
arrangement they arrived at was that Jōtarō could sweep the sacred gardens in
the daytime and spend his nights in the Arakidas' woodshed.
       As Otsū passed through the shrine gardens, a forbidding unearthly breeze
whistled through the leafless trees. One thin column of smoke rose from a distant
grove, and Otsū thought of Jōtarō, who was probably there cleaning the grounds
with his bamboo broom. She stopped and smiled, pleased that Jōtarō, the
incorrigible, was minding very well these days, applying himself dutifully to his
chores at just the age when young boys think of nothing but playing and amusing
themselves.
       The loud cracking noise she heard sounded like a branch breaking off a
tree. It came a second time, and clutching her load, she ran down the path
through the grove, calling, "Jōtarō! J-ō-ō-t-a-r-ō-ō-ō!"
       "Y-e-e-s?" came the lusty reply. In no time she heard his running footsteps.
But when he drew up before her, he said merely, "Oh, it's you."
       "I thought you were supposed to be working," said Otsū sternly. "What are
you doing with that wooden sword? And dressed in your white work clothes
too."

       "I was practicing. Practicing on the trees."
       "Nobody objects to your practicing, but not here, Jōtarō. Have you
forgotten where you are? This garden symbolizes peace and purity. It's a holy
area, sacred to the goddess who is the ancestress of us all. Look over there. Don't
you see the sign saying it's forbidden to damage the trees or hurt or kill the
animals? It's a disgrace for a person who works here to be breaking off branches
with a wooden sword."
      "Aw, I know all that," he grumbled, a look of resentment on his face.
      "If you know it, why do you do it? If Master Arakida caught you at it, you'd
      really be in trouble!"
      "I don't see anything wrong with breaking off dead limbs. It's all right if
      they're dead, isn't it?"
      "No, it is not! Not here."
      "That's how much you know! Just let me ask you a question."
      "What might that be?"
       "If this garden is so important, why don't people take better care of it?"
"It's a shame they don't. To let it run down this way is like letting weeds grow in
one's soul."
       "It wouldn't be so bad if it were only weeds, but look at the trees. The ones
split by lightning have been allowed to die, and the ones blown over by the
typhoons are lying right where they fell. They're all over the place. And the birds
have pecked at the roofs of the buildings until they leak. And nobody ever fixes
any of the stone lanterns when they get knocked out of shape.
       "How can you think this place is important? Listen, Otsū, isn't the castle at
Osaka white and dazzling when you see it from the ocean at Settsu? Isn't
Tokugawa Ieyasu building more magnificent castles at Fushimi and a dozen
other places? Aren't the new houses of the daimyō and the rich merchants in
Kyoto and Osaka glittering with gold ornaments? Don't the tea masters Rikyū
and Kobori Enshū say that even a speck of dirt out of place in the teahouse
garden spoils the flavor of the tea?
       "But this garden's going to ruin. Why, the only people working in it are me
and three or four old men! And look how big it is!"
       "Jōtarō!" said Otsū, putting her hand under his chin and lifting his face.
"You're doing nothing but repeating word for word what Master Arakida said in
a lecture."
      "Oh, did you hear it too?"
      "Indeed I did," she said reproachfully.

      "Uh, well, can't win all the time."
       "Parroting what Master Arakida says will carry no weight with me. I don't
approve of it, even when what he says is right."
       "He is right, you know. When I hear him talk, I wonder whether Nobunaga
and Hideyoshi and Ieyasu are really such great men. I know they're supposed to
be important, but is it really so wonderful to take control of the country if you
get the idea that you're the only person in it who counts?"
       "Well, Nobunaga and Hideyoshi weren't as bad as some of the others. At
least they repaired the imperial palace in Kyoto and tried to make the people
happy. Even if they did these things only to justify their conduct to themselves
and others, they still deserve a lot of credit. The Ashikaga shōguns were much
worse."
      "How?"
      "You've heard about the Ōnin War, haven't you?"
      "Um."
       "The Ashikaga shogunate was so incompetent, there was constant civil war
—warriors fighting other warriors all the time to gain more territory for
themselves. The ordinary people didn't get a moment's peace, and nobody had
any real concern for the country as a whole."
       "You mean those famous battles between the Yamanas and the
Hosokawas?"
       "Yes.... It was during those days, over a hundred years ago, that Arakida
Ujitsune became the chief priest of the Ise Shrine, and there wasn't even enough
money to continue the ancient ceremonies and sacred rites. Ujitsune petitioned
the government twenty-seven times for help to repair the shrine buildings, but
the imperial court was too poor, the shogunate was too weak, and the warriors so
busy with their bloodbaths they didn't care what happened. In spite of all this,
Ujitsune went around pleading his case till he finally succeeded in setting up a
new shrine.
       "It's a sad story, isn't it? But when you think about it, people when they
grow up forget they owe their lifeblood to their ancestors, just as we all owe our
lives to the goddess at Ise."
       Pleased with himself for having elicited this long, passionate speech from
Otsū, Jōtarō jumped in the air, laughing and clapping his hands. "Now who's
parroting Master Arakida? You thought I hadn't heard that before, didn't you?"
       "Oh, you're impossible!" exclaimed Otsū, laughing herself. She would
have cuffed him one, but her bundle was in the way. Still smiling, she glared at

the boy, who finally took notice of her unusual parcel.
       "Whose are those?" he asked, stretching out his hand.
       "Don't touch them! We don't know whose they are."
       "Oh, I'm not going to break anything. I just want to look. I bet they're
heavy. That long sword's really big, isn't it?" Jōtarō's mouth was watering.
       "Sensei!" With a patter of straw sandals, one of the shrine maidens ran up.
"Master Arakida is calling for you. I think there's something he wants you to
do." Scarcely pausing, she turned and ran back.
       Jōtarō looked around in all four directions, a startled expression on his
face. The wintry sun was shining through the trees, and the twigs swayed like
wavelets. His eyes looked as though they had spotted a phantom among the
patches of sunlight.
       "What's the matter?" asked Otsū. "What are you looking at?"
       "Oh, nothing," replied the boy dejectedly, biting his forefinger. "When that
girl called 'teacher,' I thought for a second she meant my teacher."
       Otsū, too, suddenly felt sad and a little annoyed. Though Jōtarō's remark
had been made in all innocence, why did he have to mention Musashi?
       Despite Takuan's advice, she could not conceive of trying to expel from
her heart the longing she cherished for Musashi. Takuan was so unfeeling; in a
way she pitied him and his apparent ignorance of the meaning of love.
       Love was like a toothache. When Otsū was busy, it did not bother her, but
when the remembrance struck her, she was seized by the urge to go out on the
highways again, to search for him, to find him, to place her head on his chest and
shed tears of happiness.
       Silently, she started walking. Where was he? Of all the sorrows that beset
living beings, surely the most gnawing, the most wretched, the most agonizing,
was not to be able to lay eyes on the person one pined for. Tears streaming down
her cheeks, she walked on.
       The heavy swords with their worn fittings meant nothing to her. How
could she have dreamed she was carrying Musashi's own belongings?
       Jōtarō, sensing he had done something wrong, followed sadly a short
distance behind. Then, as Otsū turned into the gate at the Arakida house, he ran
up to her and asked, "Are you angry? About what I said?"
       "Oh, no, it's nothing."
       "I'm sorry, Otsū. I really am."
       "It's not your fault. I just feel kind of sad. But don't worry about it. I'm
going to find out what Master Arakida wants. You go back to your work."

       Arakida Ujitomi called his home the House of Study. He had converted
part of it into a school, attended not only by the shrine maidens but also by forty
or fifty other children from the three counties belonging to Ise Shrine. He was
trying to impart to the young a type of learning not currently very popular: the
study of ancient Japanese history, which in the more sophisticated towns and
cities was considered irrelevant. The early history of the country was intimately
connected with Ise Shrine and its lands, but this was an age when people tended
to confuse the fate of the nation with that of the warrior class, and what had
happened in the distant past counted for little. Ujitomi was fighting a lonely
battle to plant the seeds of an earlier, more traditional culture among the young
people from the shrine area. While others might claim provincial regions had
nothing to do with the national destiny, Ujitomi took a different view. If he could
teach the local children about the past, perhaps, he thought, its spirit would one
day thrive like a great tree in the sacred forest.
       With perseverance and devotion, he talked to the children each day about
the Chinese classics and the Record of Ancient Matters, the earliest history of
Japan, hoping that his charges would eventually come to value these books. He
had been doing this for more than ten years. To his way of thinking, Hideyoshi
might seize control of the country and proclaim himself regent, Tokugawa
Ieyasu might become the omnipotent "barbarian-subduing" shōgun, but young
children should not, like their elders, mistake the lucky star of some military
hero for the beautiful sun. If he labored patiently, the young would come to
understand that it was the great Sun Goddess, not an uncouth warrior-dictator,
who symbolized the nation's aspirations.
       Arakida emerged from his spacious classroom, his face a little sweaty. As
the children flew out like a swarm of bees and darted quickly off to their homes,
a shrine maiden told him Otsū was waiting. Somewhat flustered, he said, "That's
right. I sent for her, didn't I? I completely forgot. Where is she?"
       Otsū was just outside the house, where she had been standing for some
time listening to Arakida's lecture. "Here I am," she called. "Did you want me?"
       "I'm sorry to have kept you waiting. Come inside."
       He led her to his private study, but before sitting down, pointed to the
objects she was carrying and asked what they were. She explained how she came
to have them; he squinted and stared suspiciously at the swords. "Ordinary
worshipers wouldn't come here with things like that," he said. "And they weren't
there last evening. Somebody must have come inside the walls in the middle of
the night."

       Then, with a distasteful expression on his face, he grumbled, "This may be
some samurai's idea of a joke, but I don't like it."
       "Oh? Can you think of anyone who would want to suggest that a man had
been in the House of Virgins?"
       "Yes, I can. As a matter of fact, that's what I wanted to talk to you about."
"Does it concern me in some way?"
       "Well, I don't want you to feel bad about it, but it's like this. There's a
samurai who has taken me to task for putting you in the same dormitory with the
shrine maidens. He says he's warning me for my own sake."
       "Have I done something that reflects on you?"
       "There's no reason to be upset. It's just that—well, you know how people
talk. Now don't be angry, but after all, you're not exactly a maiden. You've been
around men, and people say it tarnishes the shrine to have a woman who's not a
virgin living together with the girls in the House of Virgins."
       Although Arakida's tone was casual, angry tears flooded Otsū's eyes. It
was true that she had traveled around a lot, that she was used to meeting people,
that she had wandered through life with this old love clinging to her heart;
maybe it was only natural for people to take her for a woman of the world. It
was, nevertheless, a shattering experience to be accused of not being chaste,
when in fact she was.
       Arakida did not seem to attach much importance to the matter. It simply
disturbed him that people were saying things, and since it was the end of the year
"and all that," as he put it, he wondered if she would be so good as to discontinue
the flute lessons and move out of the House of Virgins.
       Otsū consented quickly, not as an admission of guilt, but because she had
not planned to stay on and did not want to cause trouble, especially to Master
Arakida. Notwithstanding her resentment at the falseness of the gossip, she
promptly thanked him for his kindnesses during her stay and said that she would
leave within the day.
       "Oh, it's not all that urgent," he assured her, reaching out to his small
bookcase and taking out some money, which he wrapped in paper.
       Jōtarō, who had followed Otsū, chose this moment to put his head in from
the veranda and whisper, "If you're going to leave, I'll go with you. I'm tired of
sweeping their old garden anyway."
       "Here's a little gift," said Arakida. "It's not much, but take it and use it for
travel money." He held out the packet containing a few gold coins.
       Otsū refused to touch it. With a shocked look on her face, she told him she

deserved no pay for merely giving flute lessons to the girls; rather it was she
who should be paying for her food and lodging.
       "No," he replied. "I couldn't possibly take money from you, but there is
something I'd like you to do for me in case you happen to be going to Kyoto.
You can think of this money as payment for a favor."
       "I'll be glad to do anything you ask, but your kindness is payment enough."
Arakida turned to Jōtarō and said, "Why don't I give him the money? He can buy
things for you along the way."
       "Thank you," said Jōtarō, promptly extending his hand and accepting the
packet. As an afterthought, he looked at Otsū and said, "It's all right, isn't it?"
       Confronted with a fait accompli, she gave in and thanked Arakida.
       "The favor I want to ask," he said, "is that you deliver a package from me
to Lord Karasumaru Mitsuhiro, who lives at Horikawa in Kyoto." While
speaking, he took two scrolls down from the set of staggered shelves on the wall.
"Lord Karasumaru asked me two years ago to paint these. They're finally done.
He plans to write in the commentary to go with the pictures and present the
scrolls to the Emperor. That's why I don't want to entrust them to an ordinary
messenger or courier. Will you take them to him and make sure they don't get
wet or soiled on the way?"
       This was a commission of unexpected importance, and Otsū hesitated at
first. But it would hardly do to refuse and after a moment she agreed. Arakida
then took out a box and some oiled paper, but before wrapping and sealing the
scrolls, said, "Perhaps I should show them to you first." He sat down and began
unrolling the paintings on the floor before them. He was obviously proud of his
work and wanted to take a last look himself before parting with it.
       Otsū gasped at the beauty of the scrolls, and Jōtarō's eyes widened as he
bent over to examine them more closely. Since the commentary had not yet been
written in, neither of them knew what story was depicted, but as Arakida
unrolled scene after scene, they saw before them a picture of life at the ancient
imperial court, fastidiously executed in magnificent colors with touches of
powdered gold. The paintings were in the Tosa style, which was derived from
classic Japanese art.
       Though Jōtarō had never been taught anything about art, he was dazzled
by what he saw. "Look at the fire there," he exclaimed. "It looks like it's really
burning, doesn't it?"
       "Don't touch the painting," admonished Otsū. "Just look."
       While they gazed in admiration, a servant entered and said something in a

very low voice to Arakida, who nodded and replied, "I see. I suppose it's all
right. Just in case, though, you'd better have the man make out a receipt." With
that, he gave the servant the pack and the two swords Otsū had brought to him.


       Upon learning that their flute teacher was leaving, the girls in the House of
Virgins were disconsolate. In the two months she had been with them, they had
come to regard her as an elder sister, and their faces as they gathered about her
were full of gloom.
      "Is it true?"
      "Are you really going away?"
      "Won't you ever come back?"
       From beyond the dormitory, Jōtarō shouted, "I'm ready. What's taking you
so long?" He had doffed his white robe and was once again dressed in his usual
short kimono, his wooden sword at his side. The cloth-wrapped box containing
the scrolls was suspended diagonally across his back.
       From the window, Otsū called back, "My, that was fast!"
       "I'm always fast!" retorted Jōtarō. "Aren't you ready yet? Why does it take
women so long to dress and pack?" He was sunning himself in the yard, yawning
lazily. But being impatient by nature, he quickly grew bored. "Aren't you
finished yet?" he called again.
       "I'll be there in a minute," Otsū replied. She'd already finished packing, but
the girls wouldn't let her go. Attempting to break away, Otsū said soothingly,
"Don't be sad. I'll come to visit one of these days. Till then, take good care of
yourselves." She had the uncomfortable feeling that this was not true, for in view
of what had happened, it seemed unlikely that she would ever return.
       Perhaps the girls suspected this; several were crying. Finally, someone
suggested that they all see Otsū as far as the holy bridge across the Isuzu River.
They thereupon crowded around her and escorted her out of the house. They
didn't see Jōtarō immediately, so they cupped their hands around their mouths
and called his name, but got no reply. Otsū, too used to his ways to be disturbed,
said, "He probably got tired of waiting and went on ahead."
       "What a disagreeable little boy!" exclaimed one of the girls.
       Another suddenly looked up at Otsū and asked, "Is he your son?"
       "My son? How on earth could you think that? I won't even be twenty-one
till next year. Do I look old enough to have a child that big?"
       "No, but somebody said he was yours."

       Recalling her conversation with Arakida, Otsū blushed, then comforted
herself with the thought that it made no real difference what people said, so long
as Musashi had faith in her.
       Just then, Jōtarō came running up to them. "Hey, what's going on?" he said
with a pout. "First you keep me waiting for ages, now you start off without me!"
       "But you weren't where you were supposed to be," Otsū pointed out.
       "You could have looked for me, couldn't you? I saw a man over there on
the Toba highroad who looked a little like my teacher. I ran over to see whether
it was really him."
       "Someone who looked like Musashi?"
       "Yes, but it wasn't him. I went as far as that row of trees and got a good
look at the man from behind, but it couldn't have been Musashi. Whoever it was
had a limp."
       It was always like this when Otsū and Jōtarō were traveling. Not a day
passed without their experiencing a glimmer of hope, followed by
disappointment. Everywhere they went, they saw someone who reminded them
of Musashi—the man passing by the window, the samurai in the boat that had
just left, the rōnin on horseback, the dimly seen passenger in a palanquin. Hopes
soaring, they would rush to make sure, only to find themselves looking
dejectedly at each other. It had happened dozens of times.
       For this reason, Otsū was not as upset now as she might have been, though
Jōtarō was crestfallen. Laughing the incident off, she said, "Too bad you were
wrong, but don't get mad at me for going on ahead. I thought I'd find you at the
bridge. You know, everybody says that if you start out on a journey in a bad
mood, you'll stay angry all the way. Come now, let's make up."
       Though seemingly satisfied, Jōtarō turned and cast a rude look at the girls
trailing along behind. "What are they all doing here? Are they coming with us?"
       "Of course not. They're just sorry to see me leave, so they're sweet enough
to escort us to the bridge."
       "Why, that's so very kind of them," said Jōtarō, mimicking Otsū's speech
and throwing everyone into fits of laughter. Now that he had joined the group,
the anguish of parting subsided, and the girls recovered their good spirits.
       "Otsū," called one of them, "you're turning the wrong way; that's not the
path to the bridge."
       "I know," said Otsū quietly. She had turned toward the Tamagushi Gate to
pay her respects to the inner shrine. Clapping her hands together once, she
bowed her head toward the sanctum and remained in an attitude of silent prayer

for a few moments.
       "Oh, I see," murmured Jōtarō. "She doesn't think she should leave without
saying good-bye to the goddess." He was content to watch from a distance, but
the girls started poking him in the back and asking him why he did not follow
Otsū's example. "Me?" asked the boy incredulously. "I don't want to bow before
any old shrine."
       "You shouldn't say that. You'll be punished for that someday."
       "I'd feel silly bowing like that."
       "What's silly about showing your respect to the Sun Goddess? She's not
like one of those minor deities they worship in the cities."
      "I know that."
      "Well, then, why don't you pay your respects?"
      "Because I don't want to!"
      "Contrary, aren't you!"
      "Shut up, you crazy females! All of you!"
      "Oh, my!" chorused the girls, dismayed at his rudeness.
      "What a monster!" exclaimed one.
       By this time Otsū had finished her obeisance and was coming back toward
them. "What happened?" she asked. "You look upset."
      One of the girls blurted, "He called us crazy females, just because we tried
      to get him to bow before the goddess."
      "Now, Jōtarō, you know that's not nice," Otsū admonished. "You really
      ought to say a prayer."
      "What for?"
       "Didn't you say yourself that when you thought Musashi was about to be
killed by the priests from the Hōzōin, you raised your hands and prayed as
loudly as you could? Why can't you pray here too?"
       "But ... well, they're all looking."
       "All right, we'll turn around so we can't see you."
       They all turned their backs to the boy, but Otsū stole a look behind her. He
was running dutifully toward the Tamagushi Gate. When he reached it, he faced
the shrine and, in very boyish fashion, made a deep, lightning-quick bow.
