The Pinwheel


       Musashi sat on the narrow veranda of a little seafood shop facing the sea.
The shop's specialty was sea snails, served boiling in their shells. Two women
divers, baskets of freshly caught turban shells on their arms, and a boatman
stood near the veranda. While the boatman urged him to take a ride around the
offshore islands, the two women were trying to convince him he needed some
sea snails to take with him, wherever he was headed.
       Musashi was busily engaged in removing the pus-soiled bandage from his
foot. Having suffered intensely from his injury, he could hardly believe that both
the fever and the swelling were finally gone. The foot was again normal size,
and though the skin was white and shriveled, it was only slightly painful.
       Waving the boatman and divers away, he lowered his tender foot onto the
sand and walked to the shore to wash it. Returning to the veranda, he waited for
the shopgirl he'd sent to buy new leather socks and sandals. When she came
back, he put them on and took a few cautious steps. He still had a slight limp, but
nothing like before.
      The old man cooking snails looked up. "The ferryman's calling you. Weren't
      you planning to cross over to Ōminato?"
      "Yes. I think there's a regular boat from there to Tsu."
      "There is, and there are also boats for Yokkaichi and Kuwana."
      "How many days to the end of the year?"
       The old man laughed. "I envy you," he said. "It's plain you don't have any
year-end debts to pay. Today's the twenty-fourth."
       "Is that all? I thought it was later."
       "How nice to be young!"
       As he trotted to the ferry landing, Musashi felt an urge to keep running,
farther and farther, faster and faster. The change from invalid to healthy man had
lifted his spirits, but what made him far happier was the spiritual experience he'd
had that morning.
       The ferry was already full, but he managed to make room for himself.
Directly across the bay, at Ōminato, he changed to a bigger boat, bound for
Owari. The sails filled and the boat glided over the glasslike surface of the Bay
of Ise. Musashi stood huddled with the other passengers and gazed quietly across

the water to his left—at the old market, Yamada and the Matsuzaka highroad. If
he went to Matsuzaka, he might have a chance to meet the prodigious
swordsman Mikogami Tenzen, but no, it was too soon for that. He disembarked
at Tsu as planned.
      No sooner was he off the boat than he noticed a man walking ahead of him
with a short bar at his waist. Wrapped around the bar was a chain, and at the end
of the chain was a ball. The man also wore a short field sword in a leather
sheath. He looked to be forty-two or forty-three; his face, as dark as Musashi's,
was pockmarked, and his reddish hair was pulled back in a knot.
      He might have been taken for a freebooter were it not for the young boy
following him. Soot blackened both cheeks, and he carried a sledgehammer; he
was obviously a blacksmith's apprentice.
     "Wait for me, master!"
     "Get a move on!"
     "I left the hammer on the boat."
     "Leaving behind the tools you make your living with, huh?"
     "I went back and got it."
     "And I suppose that makes you proud of yourself. The next time you forget
     anything, I'll crack your skull open for you!"
     "Master . . ." the boy pleaded.
     "Quiet!"
     "Can't we spend the night at Tsu?"
     "There's still plenty of daylight. We can make it home by nightfall."
     "I'd like to stop somewhere anyway. As long as we're on a trip, we might as
     well enjoy it."
     "Don't talk nonsense!"
      The street into the town was lined with souvenir shops and infested with
inn touts, just as in other port towns. The apprentice again lost sight of his
master and searched the crowd worriedly until the man emerged from a toy shop
with a small, colorful pinwheel.
     "Iwa!" he called to the boy.
     "Yes, sir."
     "Carry this. And be careful it doesn't get broken! Stick it in your collar."
     "Souvenir for the baby?"
      "Mm," grunted the man. After being away on a job for a few days, he was
looking forward to seeing the child's grin of delight when he handed it over.
      It almost seemed that the pair were leading Musashi. Every time he

planned to turn, they turned ahead of him. It occurred to Musashi that this
blacksmith was probably Shishido Baiken, but he could not be sure, so he
improvised a simple strategy to make certain. Feigning not to notice them, he
went ahead for a time, then dropped back again, eavesdropping all the while.
They went through the castle town and then toward the mountain road to
Suzuka, presumably the route Baiken would take to his house. Putting this
together with snatches of overheard conversation, Musashi concluded that this
was indeed Baiken.
       He had intended to go straight to Kyoto, but this chance meeting proved
too tempting. He approached and said in a friendly manner, "Going back to
Umehata?"
      The man's reply was curt. "Yes, I'm going to Umehata. Why?"
      "I was wondering if you might be Shishido Baiken."
      "I am. And who are you?"
       "My name is Miyamoto Musashi. I'm a student warrior. Not long ago I
went to your house in Ujii and met your wife. It looks to me as though fate
brought us together here."
       "Is that so?" Baiken said. With a look of sudden comprehension on his
face, he asked, "Are you the man who was staying at the inn in Yamada, the one
who wanted to have a bout with me?"
       "How did you hear about that?"
       "You sent someone to the Arakida house to find me, didn't you?" "Yes."
       "I was doing some work for Arakida, but I didn't stay at the house. I
borrowed a work place in the village. It was a job nobody could do but me."
      "I see. I hear you're an expert with the chain-ball-sickle."
      "Ha, ha! But you said you met my wife?"
      "Yes. She demonstrated one of the Yaegaki stances for me."
       "Well, that should be enough for you. There's no reason to be following
along after me. Oh, of course I could show you a great deal more than she did,
but the minute you saw it, you'd be on your way to a different world."
       Musashi's impression of the wife had been that she was pretty overbearing,
but here was real arrogance. He was fairly sure from what he had seen already
that he could take the measure of this man, but he cautioned himself not to be
hasty. Takuan had taught him life's first lesson, namely that there are a lot of
people in the world who may very well be one's betters. The lesson had been
reinforced by his experiences at the Hōzōin and at Koyagyū Castle. Before
letting his pride and confidence betray him into underestimating an adversary, he

wanted to size him up from every possible angle. While laying his groundwork,
he would remain sociable, even if at times this might strike his opponent as
being cowardly or subservient.
       In reply to Baiken's contemptuous remark, he said, with an air of respect
befitting his youth, "I see. I did indeed learn a good deal from your wife, but
since I've had the good fortune to meet you, I'd be grateful if you'd tell me more
about the weapon you use."
       "If all you want to do is talk, fine. Are you planning to stay overnight at
the inn by the barrier?"
       "That's what I had in mind, unless you'd be kind enough to put me up for
another night."
       "You're welcome to stay, if you're willing to sleep in the smithy with Iwa.
But I don't run an inn and we don't have extra bedding."
       At sunset they reached the foot of Mount Suzuka; the little village, under
red clouds, looked as placid as a lake. Iwa ran on ahead to announce their arrival,
and when they got to the house, Baiken's wife was waiting under the eaves,
holding the baby and the pinwheel.
       "Look, look, look!" she cooed. "Daddy's been away, Daddy's come back.
See, there he is."
       In a twinkling, Daddy ceased to be the epitome of arrogance and broke
into a fatherly smile. "Here, boy, here's Daddy," he babbled, holding up his hand
and making his fingers dance.
       Husband and wife disappeared inside and sat down, talking only about the
baby and household matters, paying no attention to Musashi.
       Finally, when dinner was ready, Baiken remembered his guest. "Oh, yes,
give that fellow something to eat," he told his wife.
       Musashi was sitting in the dirt-floored smithy, warming himself by the
forge. He hadn't even removed his sandals.
       "He was just here the other day. He spent the night," the woman replied
sullenly. She put some sake to warm in the hearth in front of her husband.
"Young man," Baiken called. "Do you drink sake?"
       "I don't dislike it."
       "Have a cup."
       "Thanks." Moving to the threshold of the hearth room, Musashi accepted a
cup of the local brew and put it to his lips. It tasted sour. After downing it, he
offered the cup to Baiken, saying, "Let me pour you a cup."
      "Never mind, I have one." He looked at Musashi for an instant, then asked,

      "How old are you?"
      "Twenty-two."
      "Where do you come from?"
      "Mimasaka."
      Baiken's eyes, which had wandered off in another direction, swung back to
      Musashi, reexamining him from head to toe.
      "Let's see, you mentioned it a while ago. Your name—what's your name?"
      "Miyamoto Musashi."
      "How do you write Musashi?"
      "It's written the same way as Takezō."
       The wife came in and put soup, pickles, chopsticks and a bowl of rice on
the straw mat before Musashi. "Eat!" she said unceremoniously.
       "Thanks," replied Musashi.
       Baiken waited a couple of breaths, then said, as though to himself, "It's hot
       now—the sake." Pouring Musashi another cup, he asked in an offhand
manner, "Does that mean you were called Takezō when you were younger?"
"Yes."
       "Were you still called that when you were seventeen or so?"
       "Yes."
       "When you were about that age, you weren't by any chance at the Battle of
Sekigahara with another boy about your age, were you?"
       It was Musashi's turn to be surprised. "How did you know?" he said
slowly. "Oh, I know a lot of things. I was at Sekigahara too."
      Hearing this, Musashi felt better disposed toward the man; Baiken, too,
      seemed suddenly more friendly.
      "I thought I'd seen you somewhere," said the blacksmith. "I guess we must
      have met on the battlefield."
      "Were you in the Ukita camp too?"
       "I was living in Yasugawa then, and I went to the war with a group of
samurai from there. We were in the front lines, we were."
      "Is that so? I guess we probably saw each other then."
      "Whatever happened to your friend?"
      "I haven't seen him since."
      "Since the battle?"
      "Not exactly. We stayed for a time at a house in Ibuki, waiting for my
      wounds to heal. We, uh, parted there. That was the last I saw of him."
      Baiken let his wife know they were out of sake. She was already in bed

      with
      the baby. "There isn't any more," she answered.
      "I want some more. Now!"
      "Why do you have to drink so much tonight, of all nights?"
      "We're having an interesting little talk here. Need some more sake." "But
      there isn't any."
       "Iwa!" he called through the flimsy board wall in a corner of the smithy.
"What is it, sir?" said the boy. He pushed open the door and showed his face,
stooping because the lintel was so low.
       "Go over to Onosaku's house and borrow a bottle of sake."
       Musashi had had enough to drink. "If you don't mind, I'll go ahead and
eat," he said, picking up his chopsticks.
       "No, no, wait," said Baiken, quickly grabbing Musashi's wrist. "It's not
time to eat. Now that I've sent for some sake, have a little more."
       "If you were getting it for me, you shouldn't have. I don't think I can drink
another drop."
       "Aw, come now," Baiken insisted. "You said you wanted to hear more
about the chain-ball-sickle. I'll tell you everything I know, but let's have a few
drinks while we're talking."
       When Iwa returned with the sake, Baiken poured some into a heating jar,
put it on the fire, and talked at great length about the chain-ball-sickle and ways
to use it to advantage in actual combat. The best thing about it, he told Musashi,
was that, unlike a sword, it gave the enemy no time to defend himself. Also,
before attacking the enemy directly, it was possible to snatch his weapon away
from him with the chain. A skillful throw of the chain, a sharp yank, and the
enemy had no more sword.
       Still seated, Baiken demonstrated a stance. "You see, you hold the sickle in
your left hand and the ball in your right. If the enemy comes at you, you take
him on with the blade, then hurl the ball at his face. That's one way."
       Changing positions, he went on, "Now, in this case, when there's some
space between you and the enemy, you take his weapon away with the chain. It
doesn't make any difference what kind of weapon it is—sword, lance, wooden
staff, or whatever."
       Baiken went on and on, telling Musashi about ways of throwing the ball,
about the ten or more oral traditions concerning the weapon, about how the chain
was like a snake, about how it was possible by cleverly alternating the
movements of the chain and the sickle to create optical illusions and cause the

enemy's defense to work to his own detriment, about all the secret ways of using
the weapon.
       Musashi was fascinated. When he heard talk like this, he listened with his
whole body, eager to absorb every detail.
       The chain. The sickle. Two hands .. .
       As he listened, the seeds of other thoughts formed in his mind. "The sword
can be used with one hand, but a man has two hands...."
       The second bottle of sake was empty. While Baiken had drunk a good
deal, he pressed even more on Musashi, who had far surpassed his limit and was
drunker than he ever had been before.
       "Wake up!" Baiken called to his wife. "Let our guest sleep there. You and I
can sleep in the back room. Go spread some bedding."
       The woman did not budge.
       "Get up!" Baiken said more loudly. "Our guest is tired. Let him go to bed
now."
       His wife's feet were nice and warm now; getting up would be
uncomfortable. "You said he could sleep in the smithy with Iwa," she mumbled.
"Enough of your back talk. Do as I say!"
       She got up in a huff and stalked off to the back room. Baiken took the
sleeping baby in his arms and said, "The quilts are old, but the fire's right here
beside you. If you get thirsty, there's hot water on it for tea. Go to bed. Make
yourself comfortable." He, too, went into the back room.
       When the woman came back to exchange pillows, the sullenness was gone
from her face. "My husband's very drunk too," she said, "and he's probably tired
from his trip. He says he plans to sleep late, so make yourself comfortable and
sleep as long as you want. Tomorrow I'll give you a nice hot breakfast."
       "Thanks." Musashi could think of nothing more to say. He could hardly
wait to get out of his leather socks and cloak. "Thanks a lot."
       He dived into the still warm quilts, but his own body was even hotter from
drink.
       The wife stood in the doorway watching him, then quietly blew out the
candle and said, "Good night."
       Musashi's head felt as if it had a tight steel band around it; his temples
throbbed painfully. He wondered why he had drunk so much more than usual.
He felt awful, but couldn't help thinking about Baiken. Why had the blacksmith,
who had seemed hardly civil at first, suddenly grown friendly and sent out for
more sake? Why had his disagreeable wife become sweet and solicitous all of a

sudden? Why had they given him this warm bed?
        It all seemed inexplicable, but before Musashi had solved the mystery,
drowsiness overcame him. He closed his eyes, took a few deep breaths, and
pulled the covers up. Only his forehead remained exposed, lit up by occasion al
sparks from the hearth. By and by, there was the sound of deep, steady breathing.
        Baiken's wife retreated stealthily into the back room, the pit-a-pat of her
feet moving stickily across the tatami.
        Musashi had a dream, or rather the fragment of one, which kept repeating
itself. A childhood memory flitted about his sleeping brain like an insect, trying,
it seemed, to write something in luminescent letters. He heard the words of a
lullaby.


           Go to sleep, go to sleep.
           Sleeping babies are sweet... .


       He was back home in Mimasaka, hearing the lullaby the blacksmith's wife
had sung in the Ise dialect. He was a baby in the arms of a light-skinned woman
of about thirty ... his mother.... This woman must be his mother. At his mother's
breast, he looked up at her white face.
       ". . . naughty, and they make their mothers cry too...." Cradling him in her
arms, his mother sang softly. Her thin, well-bred face looked faintly bluish, like a
pear blossom. There was a wall, a long stone wall, on which there was liverwort.
And a dirt wall, above which branches darkened in the approaching night. Light
from a lamp streamed from the house. Tears glistened on his mother's cheeks.
The baby looked in wonder at the tears.
       "Go away! Go back to your home!'
       It was the forbidding voice of Munisai, coming from inside the house. And
it was a command. Musashi's mother arose slowly. She ran along a long stone
embankment. Weeping, she ran into the river and waded toward the center.
       Unable to talk, the baby squirmed in his mother's arms, tried to tell her
there was danger ahead. The more he fretted, the more tightly she held him. Her
moistened cheek rubbed against his. "Takezō," she said, "are you your father's
child, or your mother's?"
       Munisai shouted from the bank. His mother sank beneath the water. The
baby was cast up on the pebbly bank, where he lay wailing at the top of his lungs

amid blooming primroses.
        Musashi opened his eyes. When he started to doze off again, a woman—
his mother? someone else?—intruded into his dream and woke him again.
Musashi could not remember his mother's appearance. He thought of her often,
but he couldn't have drawn her face. Whenever he saw another mother, he
thought perhaps his own mother had looked the same.
        "Why tonight?" he thought.
        The sake had worn off. He opened his eyes and gazed at the ceiling. Amid
the blackness of the soot was a reddish light, the reflection from the embers in
the hearth. His gaze came to rest on the pinwheel suspended from the ceiling
above him. He noticed, too, that the smell of mother and child still clung to the
bedcovers. With a vague feeling of nostalgia, he lay half asleep, staring at the
pinwheel.
        The pinwheel started slowly to revolve. There was nothing strange about
this; it was made to turn. But ... but not unless there was a breeze! Musashi
started to get up, then stopped and listened closely. There was the sound of a
door being slid quietly shut. The pinwheel stopped turning.
        Musashi quietly put his head back on the pillow and tried to fathom what
was going on in the house. He was like an insect under a leaf, attempting to
divine the weather above. His whole body was attuned to the slightest change in
his surroundings, his sensitive nerves absolutely taut. Musashi knew that his life
was in danger, but why?
        "Is it a den of robbers?" he asked himself at first, but no. If they were
professional thieves, they'd know he had nothing worth stealing.
        "Has he got a grudge against me?" That did not seem to work either.
Musashi was quite sure he had never even seen Baiken before.
        Without being able to figure out a motive, he could feel in his skin and
bones that someone or something was threatening his very life. He also knew
that whatever it was was very near; he had to decide quickly whether to lie and
wait for it to come, or get out of the way ahead of time.
        Slipping his hand over the threshold into the smithy, he groped for his
sandals. He slipped first one, then the other, under the cover and down to the foot
of the bedding.
        The pinwheel started to whirl again. In the light of the fire, it turned like a
bewitched flower. Footsteps were faintly audible both inside and outside the
house, as Musashi quietly wadded the bedding together into the rough shape of a
human body.

       Under the short curtain hanging in the doorway appeared two eyes,
belonging to a man crawling in with his sword unsheathed. Another, carrying a
lance and clinging closely to the wall, crept around to the foot of the bed. The
two stared at the bedclothes, listening for the sleeper's breathing. Then, like a
cloud of smoke, a third man jumped forward. It was Baiken, holding the sickle
in his left hand and the ball in his right.
       The men's eyes met and they synchronized their breathing. The man at the
head of the bed kicked the pillow into the air, and the man at the foot, jumping
down into the smithy, aimed his lance at the reclining form.
       Keeping the sickle behind him, Baiken shouted, "Up, Musashi!" Neither
answer nor movement came from the bedding.
       The man with the lance threw back the covers. "He's not here!" he shouted.
       Baiken, casting a confused look around the room, caught sight of the
rapidly whirling pinwheel. "There's a door open somewhere!" he shouted.
       Soon another man cried out angrily. The door from the smithy onto a path
that went around to the back of the house was open about three feet, and a biting
wind was blowing in.
       "He got out through here!"
       "What are those fools doing?" Baiken screamed, running outside. From
under the eaves and out of the shadows, black forms came forward.
       "Master! Did it go all right?" asked a low voice excitedly.
       Baiken glowered with rage. "What do you mean, you idiot? Why do you
think I put you out here to keep watch? He's gone! He must have come this way .
       "Gone? How could he get out?"
       "You're asking me? You thick-headed ass!" Baiken went back inside and
stamped around nervously. "There are only two ways he could have gone: he
either went up to Suzuka ford or back to the Tsu highway. Whichever it was, he
couldn't have gone far. Go get him!"
       "Which way do you think he went?"
       "Ugh! I'll go toward Suzuka. You cover the lower road!"
       The men inside joined forces with the men outside, making a motley group
of about ten, all armed. One of them, carrying a musket, looked like a hunter;
another, with a short field sword, was probably a woodcutter.
       As they parted, Baiken shouted, "If you find him, fire the gun, then
everybody come together."
       They set off at great speed, but after about an hour came straggling back,
looking hangdog and talking dejectedly among themselves. They expected a

tongue-lashing from their leader, but when they reached the house, they found
Baiken sitting on the ground in the smithy, eyes downcast and expressionless.
       When they tried to cheer him up, he said, "No use crying about it now."
Searching about for a way to vent his wrath, he seized a piece of charred wood
and broke it sharply over his knee.
       "Bring some sake! I want a drink." He stirred up the fire again and threw
on more kindling.
       Baiken's wife, trying to quiet the baby, reminded him there was no more
sake. One of the men volunteered to bring some from his house, which he did
with dispatch. Soon the brew was warm, and the cups were being passed around.
      The conversation was sporadic and gloomy.
      "It makes me mad."
      "The rotten little bastard!"
      "He leads a charmed life. I'll say that for him."
      "Don't worry about it, master. You did everything you could. The men
      outside fell down on their job."
      Those referred to apologized shamefacedly.
       They tried to get Baiken drunk, so he would go to sleep, but he just sat
there, frowning at the bitterness of the sake, but taking no one to task for the
failure.
       Finally, he said, "I shouldn't have made such a big thing out of it, getting
so many of you to help. I could have handled him all by myself, but I thought I'd
better be careful. After all, he did kill my brother, and Tsujikaze Temma was no
mean fighter."
       "Could that rōnin really be the boy who was hiding in Okō's house four
years ago?"
       "He must be. My dead brother's spirit brought him here, I'm sure. At first
the thought never crossed my mind, but then he told me he'd been at Sekigahara,
and his name used to be Takezō. He's the right age and the right type of person to
have killed my brother. I know it was him."
       "Come on, master, don't think about it anymore tonight. Lie down. Get
some sleep."
       They all helped him to bed; someone picked up the pillow that had been
kicked aside and put it under his head. The instant Baiken's eyes were closed, the
anger that had filled him was replaced by loud snoring.
       The men nodded to each other and drifted off, dispersing into the mist of
early morning. They were all riffraff—underlings of freebooters like Tsujikaze

Temma of Ibuki and Tsujikaze Kōhei of Yasugawa, who now called himself
Shishido Baiken. Or else they were hangers-on at the bottom of the ladder in
open society. Driven by the changing times, they had become farmers or artisans
or hunters, but they still had teeth, which were only too ready to bite honest
people when the opportunity arose.
       The only sounds in the house were those made by the sleeping inhabitants
and the gnawing of a field rat.
       In the corner of the passageway connecting the workroom and kitchen,
next to a large earthen oven, stood a stack of firewood. Above this hung an
umbrella and heavy straw rain capes. In the shadows between the oven and the
wall, one of the rain capes moved, slowly and quietly inching up the wall until it
hung on a nail.
       The smoky figure of a man suddenly seemed to come out of the wall itself.
Musashi had never gone a step away from the house. After slipping out from
under the covers, he had opened the outer door and then merged with the
firewood, drawing the rain cape down over him.
       He walked silently across the smithy and looked at Baiken. Adenoids,
thought Musashi, for the snoring was thunderous. The situation struck him as
humorous, and his face twisted into a grin.
       He stood there for a moment, thinking. To all intents and purposes, he had
won his bout with Baiken. It had been a clear-cut victory. Still, this man lying
here was the brother of Tsujikaze Temma and had tried to murder him to comfort
the spirit of his dead brother—an admirable sentiment for a mere freebooter.
       Should Musashi kill him? If he left him alive, he would go on looking for
an opportunity to take his revenge, and the safe course was doubtless to do away
with him here and now. But there remained the question of whether he was
worth killing.
       Musashi pondered for a time, before hitting on what seemed exactly the
right solution. Going to the wall by Baiken's feet, he took down one of the
blacksmith's own weapons. While he eased the blade from its groove, he
examined the sleeping face. Then, wrapping a piece of damp paper around the
blade, he carefully laid it across Baiken's neck; he stepped back and admired his
handiwork.
       The pinwheel was sleeping too. If it were not for the paper wrapping,
thought Musashi, the wheel might wake in the morning and turn wildly at the
sight of its master's head fallen from the pillow.
       When Musashi had killed Tsujikaze Temma, he had had a reason, and

anyway, he had still been burning with the fever of battle. But he had nothing to
gain from taking the blacksmith's life. And who could tell? If he did kill him, the
infant owner of the pinwheel might spend his life seeking to avenge his father's
murder.
        It was a night on which Musashi had thought time and again of his own
father and mother. He felt a little envious as he stood here by this sleeping
family, sensing the faint sweet scent of mother's milk about him. He even felt a
little reluctant to take his leave.
        In his heart, he spoke to them: "I'm sorry to have troubled you. Sleep
well." He quietly opened the outer door and went out.
