The Seashell of Forgetfulness


       It was evening when the ship entered the harbor at Kizugawa, where it was
met by the all-pervading odor of fish. Reddish lights twinkled onshore, and the
waves hummed steadily in the background. Little by little, the distance between
the raised voices coming from the ship and those issuing from the shore closed
up. With a white splash, the anchor was dropped; ropes were cast and the
gangplank was moved into place.
      A flurry of excited cries filled the air.
      "Is the son of the priest at the Sumiyoshi Shrine aboard?"
      "Is there a runner around?"
      "Master! Here we are, over here!"
       Like a wave, paper lanterns bearing the names of various inns rolled across
the dock toward the ship, as the touts vied with each other for business. "Anyone
for the Kashiwaya Inn?"
       The young man with the monkey on his shoulder pushed his way through
the crowd.
       "Come to our place, sir—no charge for the monkey."
       "We're right in front of Sumiyoshi Shrine. It's a great place for pilgrims.
You can have a beautiful room with a beautiful view!"
      No one had come to meet the youth. He walked straight away from the
      dock, paying no attention to the touts or anyone else.
      "Who does he think he is?" growled one passenger. "Just because he knows
      a little swordsmanship!"
      "If I weren't just a townsman, he wouldn't have gotten away without a
      fight."
       "Oh, calm down! Let the warriors think they're better than anybody else.
As long as they're strutting around like kings, they're happy. The thing for us
townsmen to do is to let them have the flowers while we take the fruit. Why get
excited over today's little incident?"
       While talking on in this fashion, the merchants saw to it that their
mountains of baggage were properly gathered together, then disembarked, to be
met by swarms of people and lanterns and vehicles. There was not one among
them who was not immediately surrounded by several solicitous women.

      The last person off the ship was Gion Tōji, on whose face there was an
expression of extreme discomfort. Never in all his life had he spent a more
unpleasant day. His head was decently covered with a kerchief to conceal the
mortifying loss of his topknot, but the cloth did nothing to hide his downcast
eyebrows and sullen lips.
      "Tōji! Here I am!" called Okō. Though her head was also covered with a
kerchief, her face had been exposed to the cold wind while she was waiting, and
her wrinkles showed through the white powder that was meant to hide them.
     "Okō! So you came after all."
     "Isn't that what you expected? You sent me a letter telling me to meet you
     here, didn't you?"
     "Yes, but I thought it might not have reached you in time."
     "Is something the matter? You look upset."
     "Oh, it's nothing. Just a little seasick. Come on, let's go to Sumiyoshi and
     find a nice inn."
     "Come this way. I have a palanquin waiting."
     "Thanks. Did you reserve a room for us?"
     "Yes. Everybody's waiting at the inn."
      A look of consternation crossed Tōji's face. "Everybody? What are you
talking about? I thought just the two of us were going to spend a couple of
pleasant days here at some quiet place. If there are a lot of people around, I'm not
going."
      Refusing the palanquin, he strode angrily on ahead. When Okō tried to
explain, he cut her off and called her an idiot. All the rage that had built up
inside him on the ship exploded.
      "I'll stay somewhere by myself!" he bellowed. "Send the palanquin away!
How could you be such a fool? You don't understand me at all." He snatched his
sleeve away from her and hurried on.
      They were in the fish market by the waterfront; all the shops were closed,
and the scales strewn about the street glittered like tiny silver seashells. Since
there was virtually no one around to see them, Okō hugged Tōji and attempted to
soothe him.
      "Let go of me!" he shouted.
      "If you go off by yourself, the others will think something's wrong." "Let
them think what they want!"
      "Oh, don't talk like that!" she pleaded. Her cool cheek pressed against his.
The sweetish odor of her powder and her hair penetrated his being, and gradually

his anger and frustration ebbed.
     "Please," begged Okō.
     "It's just that I'm so disappointed," he said.
     "I know, but we'll have other chances to be together."
     "But these two or three days with you—I was really looking forward to
     them."
     "I understand that."
       "If you understood, why did you drag a lot of other people along? It's
because you don't feel about me the way I feel about you!"
       "Now you're starting on that again," said Okō reproachfully, staring ahead
and looking as if the tears were about to flow. But instead of weeping, she made
another attempt to get him to listen to her explanation. When the runner had
arrived with Tōji's letter, she had, of course, made plans to come to Osaka alone,
but as luck would have it, that very night Seijūrō had come to the Yomogi with
six or seven of his students, and Akemi had let it slip out that Tōji was arriving.
In no time at all, the men had decided that they should all accompany Okō to
Osaka and that Akemi should come along with them. In the end, the party that
checked into the inn in Sumiyoshi numbered ten.
       While Tōji had to admit that under the circumstances there was not much
Okō could have done, his gloomy mood did not improve. This had clearly not
been his day, and he was sure there was worse to come. For one thing, the first
question he expected to hear would concern how he had made out on his
canvassing campaign, and he hated to have to give them the bad news. What he
dreaded far more was the prospect of having to take the kerchief off his head.
How could he ever explain the missing topknot? Ultimately he realized there
was no way out and resigned himself to his fate.
       "Oh, all right," he said, "I'll go with you. Have the palanquin brought
here."
       "Oh, I'm so happy!" cooed Okō, as she turned back toward the dock.


      At the inn, Seijūrō and the others had taken a bath, wrapped themselves up
snugly in the cotton-padded kimonos provided by the inn, and settled down to
wait for Tōji and Okō's return. When, after a time, they failed to reappear,
someone said, "Those two will be here sooner or later. There's no reason to sit
here doing nothing."
      The natural consequence of this statement was the ordering of sake. At

first they drank merely to pass the time, but soon legs began to stretch out
comfortably, and the sake cups to pass back and forth more rapidly. It was not
long before everybody had more or less forgotten about Tōji and Okō.
        "Don't they have any singing girls in Sumiyoshi?"
        "Say, that's a good idea! Why don't we call in three or four nice girls?"
        Seijūrō looked hesitant until someone suggested that he and Akemi retire
to another room, where it would be quieter. The none-too-subtle move to get rid
of him brought a wistful smile to his face, but he was nevertheless happy to
leave. It would be far more pleasant to be alone with Akemi in a room with a
warm kotatsu than to be drinking with this crew of ruffians.
        As soon as he was out of the room, the party began in earnest, and before
long several singing girls of the class known locally as the "pride of
Tosamagawa" appeared in the garden outside the room. Their flutes and
shamisen were old, of poor quality and battered from use.
        "Why are you making so much noise?" one of the women asked saucily.
"Did you come here to drink or to have a brawl?"
        The man who had appointed himself ringleader called back, "Don't ask
foolish questions. Nobody pays money to fight! We called you in so we could
drink and have some fun."
        "Well," said the girl tactfully, "I'm glad to hear that, but I do wish you'd be
a little quieter."
        "If that's the way you want it, fine! Let's sing some songs."
        In deference to the feminine presence, several hairy shins were retracted
under kimono skirts, and a few horizontal bodies became vertical. The music
started, spirits rose, and the party gained momentum. It was in full swing when a
young maid came in and announced that the man who had come in on the ship
from Shikoku had arrived with his companion.
       "What'd she say? Somebody coming?"
       "Yeah, she said somebody named Tōji's coming."
       "Great! Wonderful! Good old Tōji's coming.... Who's Tōji?"
        Tōji's entrance with Okō did not interrupt the proceedings in the least; in
fact, they were ignored. Having been led to believe the gathering was all for his
sake, Tōji was disgusted.
        He called back the maid who had shown them in and asked to be taken to
Seijūrō's room. But as they went into the hall, the ringleader, reeking of sake,
staggered over and threw his arms around Tōji's neck.
        "Hey, Tōji!" he slurred. "Just get back? You must have been having a good

time with Okō somewhere while we sat here waiting. Now, that's not the thing to
do!"
       Tōji tried unsuccessfully to shake him off. The man dragged him
struggling into the room. In the process, he stepped on a tray or two, kicked over
several sake jars, then fell to the floor, bringing Tōji down with him.
       "My kerchief!" gasped Tōji. His hand sped to his head, too late. On his
way down, the ringleader had snatched at the kerchief and now had it in his
hand. With a collective gasp, all eyes looked straight at the spot where Tōji's
topknot should have been.
      "What happened to your head?"
      "Ha, ha, ha! That's some hairdo!"
      "Where did you get it?"
      Tōji's face flushed blood red. Grabbing the kerchief and replacing it, he
      sputtered, "Oh, it's nothing. I had a boil."
      To a man, they doubled up with laughter.
      "He brought a boil back with him as a souvenir!"
      "Cover the vile spot!"
      "Don't talk about it. Show us!"
       It was obvious from the feeble jokes that nobody believed Tōji, but the
party went on, and no one had much to say about the topknot.
       The next morning it was a different matter altogether. Ten o'clock found
the same group assembled on the beach behind the inn, sober now and engaged
in a very serious conference. They sat in a circle, some with shoulders squared,
some with arms crossed, but all looking grim.
      "Any way you look at it, it's bad."
      "The question is, is it true?"
      "I heard it with my own ears. Are you calling me a liar?"
      "We can't let it pass without doing anything. The honor of the Yoshioka
      School is at stake. We have to act!"
      "Of course, but what do we do?"
       "Well, it's still not too late. We'll find the man with the monkey and cut off
his topknot. We'll show him that it's not just Gion Tōji's pride that's involved. It's
a matter that concerns the dignity of the whole Yoshioka School! Any
objections?" The drunken ringleader of the night before was now a gallant
lieutenant, spurring his men on to battle.
       Upon awakening, the men had ordered the bath heated, so as to wash away
their hangovers, and while they were in the bath, a merchant had come in. Not

knowing who they were, he told them about what had happened on the ship the
day before. He furnished them with a humorous account of the cutting off of the
topknot and concluded his tale by saying that "the samurai who had lost his hair
claimed to be a leading disciple of the House of Yoshioka in Kyoto. All I can say
is that if he really is, the House of Yoshioka must be in worse shape than anyone
imagines."
       Sobering up fast, the Yoshioka disciples had gone looking for their
wayward senior to question him about the incident. They soon discovered he had
risen early, spoken a few words with Seijūrō, and departed with Okō for Kyoto
right after breakfast. This confirmed the essential accuracy of the story, but
rather than pursue the cowardly Tōji, they decided it would make better sense to
find the unknown youth with the monkey and vindicate the Yoshioka name.
       Having agreed upon a plan at their seaside council of war, they now stood
up, brushed the sand off their kimonos and moved into action.
       A short distance away, Akemi, bare-legged, had been playing at the edge
of the water, picking up seashells one by one, then discarding them almost
immediately. Even though it was winter, the sun was shining warmly, and the
smell of the sea rose from the froth of the breakers, which stretched out like
chains of white roses as far as the eye could see.
       Akemi, wide-eyed with curiosity, watched the Yoshioka men as they all
ran off in different directions, the tips of their scabbards in the air. When the last
of them passed her, she called out to him, "Where are you all going?"
      "Oh, it's you!" he said. "Why don't you come search with me? Everybody's
      been assigned a territory to cover."
      "What are you looking for?"
      "A young samurai with a long forelock. He's carrying a monkey." "What did
      he do?"
       "Something that will disgrace the Young Master's name unless we act
fast." He told her what had happened, but failed to raise even a spark of interest.
      "You people are always looking for a fight!" she said disapprovingly.
      "It's not that we like to fight, but if we let him get away with this, it'll bring
      shame on the school, the greatest center of the martial arts in the country."
      "Oh, what if it does?"
      "Are you crazy?"
      "You men spend all your time running after the silliest things."
      "Huh?" He squinted at her suspiciously. "And what have you been doing
      out here all this time?"

     "Me?" She dropped her eyes to the beautiful sand around her feet and said,
     "I'm looking for seashells."
      "Why look for them? There are millions of them all over the place. It just
goes to show you—women waste their time in crazier ways than men."
      "I'm looking for a very particular type of shell. It's called the seashell of
forgetfulness."
      "Oh? And is there really such a shell?"
      "Yes, but they say you can only find it here on the shore at Sumiyoshi."
"Well, I'll bet there's no such thing!"
      "There is too! If you don't believe it, come with me. I'll show you."
      She pulled the reluctant youth over to a row of pine trees and pointed to a
stone on which an ancient poem was carved.

           Had I but the time
           I'd find it on the Sumiyoshi shore.
           They say it comes there—
           The shell that brings
           Oblivion to love.


     Proudly, Akemi said, "See? What more proof do you need?"
     "Aw, that's only a myth, one of those useless lies they tell in poetry."
     "But in Sumiyoshi they also have flowers that make you forget, and water
     too."
     "Well, suppose it does exist. What magic will it work for you?"
     "It's simple. If you put one in your obi or sleeve, you can forget
     everything."
     The samurai laughed. "You mean you want to be more absentminded than
     you already are?"
      "Yes. I'd like to forget everything. Some things I can't forget, so I'm
unhappy in the daytime and lie awake nights. That's why I'm looking for it. Why
don't you stay and help me look?"
      "This is no time for child's play!" the samurai said scornfully, then
suddenly remembering his duty, flew off at full speed.
      When she was sad, Akemi often thought her problems would be solved if
she could only forget the past and enjoy the present. Right now she was hugging
herself and wavering between holding on to the few memories she cherished and

wanting to cast them out to sea. If there really were such a thing as a seashell of
forgetfulness, she decided, she wouldn't carry it herself, but instead sneak it into
Seijūrō's sleeve. She sighed, imagining how lovely life would be if he would just
forget all about her.
        The very thought of him turned her heart cold. She was tempted to believe
he existed for the sole purpose of ruining her youth. When he importuned her
with his wheedling protestations of love, she comforted herself by thinking of
Musashi. But if Musashi's presence in her heart was at times her salvation, it was
also a frequent source of misery, for it made her want to run away to escape into
a world of dreams. Yet she hesitated to give herself up entirely to fantasy,
knowing it was likely that Musashi had forgotten her completely.
        "Oh, if there was some way I could erase his face from my mind!" she
thought.
        The blue water of the Inland Sea looked suddenly tempting. Staring at it,
she grew frightened. How easy it would be to run straight in and disappear.
        Her mother had no idea Akemi entertained such desperate thoughts, let
alone Seijūrō. All the people around her considered her a very happy creature, a
little flippant perhaps, but nonetheless a bud still so far from blossoming that she
couldn't possibly accept the love of a man.
        To Akemi, her mother and the men who came to the teahouse were
something outside her own self. In their presence, she laughed and joked, tinkled
her bell and pouted as the occasion seemed to demand, but when she was alone,
her sighs were care-filled and sullen.
        Her thoughts were interrupted by a servant from the inn. Spotting her by
the stone inscription, he ran up and said, "Young lady, where've you been? The
Young Master's been calling for you, and he's getting very worried."
        Back at the inn, Akemi found Seijūrō all alone, warming his hands under
the red quilt covering the kotatsu. The room was silent. In the garden a breeze
rustled through the withered pines.
       "Have you been out in this cold?" he asked.
       "What do you mean? I don't think it's cold. It's very sunny on the beach."
       "What have you been doing?"
       "Looking for seashells."
       "You act like a child."
        "I am a child."
        "How old do you think you'll be on your next birthday?"
        "It doesn't make any difference. I'm still a child. What's wrong with that?"

"There's a great deal wrong with it. You ought to think about your mother's plans
for you."
      "My mother? She's not thinking about me. She's convinced she's still young
      herself."
      "Sit down here."
      "I don't want to. I'd get too hot. I'm still young, remember?"
       "Akemi!" He seized her wrist and pulled her toward him. "There's no one
else here today. Your mother had the delicacy to return to Kyoto."
      Akemi looked at Seijūrō's burning eyes; her body stiffened. She tried
      unconsciously to back away, but he held her wrist tightly.
      "Why are you trying to run away?" he asked accusingly.
      "I'm not trying to run away."
      "There's no one here now. It's a perfect opportunity, isn't it, Akemi?" "For
      what?"
       "Don't be so obstinate! We've been seeing each other for nearly a year. You
know how I feel about you. Okō gave her permission long ago. She says you
won't give in to me because I don't go about it the right way. So today, let's—"
      "Stop! Let go of my arm! Let go, I tell you!" Akemi suddenly bent over and
      lowered her head in embarrassment.
      "You won't have me, whatever happens?"
      "Stop! Let go!"
       Though her arm had turned red under his grasp, he still refused to release
her, and the girl was hardly strong enough to resist the military techniques of the
Kyōhachi Style.
       Seijūrō was different today from his usual self. He often sought comfort
and consolation in sake, but today he had drunk nothing. "Why do you treat me
this way, Akemi? Are you trying to humiliate me?"
      "I don't want to talk about it! If you don't let me go, I'll scream!"
      "Scream away! Nobody'll hear you. The main house is too far away, and
      anyway, I told them we were not to be disturbed."
      "I want to leave."
      "I won't let you."
      "My body doesn't belong to you!"
      "Is that the way you feel? You'd better ask your mother about that! I've
      certainly paid her enough for it."
      "Well, my mother may have sold me, but I haven't sold myself! Certainly
      not to a man I despise more than death itself!"

     "What's that?" shouted Seijūrō, throwing the red quilt over her head. Akemi
     screamed for all she was worth.
     "Scream, you bitch! Scream all you want! Nobody's coming."
      On the shoji the pale sunlight mingled with the restless shadow of the
pines as though nothing had happened. Outside, all was quiet, save for the
distant lapping of the waves and the chatter of the birds.
      Deep silence followed Akemi's muffled wails. After a time, Seijūrō, his
face deathly pale, appeared in the outer corridor, holding his right hand over his
scratched and bleeding left hand.
      Shortly afterward, the door opened again with a bang, and Akemi
emerged. With a cry of surprise, Seijūrō, his hand now wrapped in a towel,
moved as though to stop her, but not in time. The half-crazed girl fled with
lightning speed.
      Seijūrō's face creased worriedly, but he did not pursue her as she crossed
the garden and went into another part of the inn. After a moment, a thin, crooked
smile appeared on his lips. It was a smile of deep satisfaction.
