Eagle Mountain


       In the 1550s and 1560s, the most famous master swordsmen in eastern
Japan were Tsukahara Bokuden and Lord Kōizumi of Ise, whose rivals in central
Honshu were Yoshioka Kempō of Kyoto and Yagyū Muneyoshi of Yamato. In
addition there was Lord Kitabatake Tomonori of Kuwana, a master of the martial
arts and an outstanding governor. Long after his death, the people of Kuwana
spoke of him with affection, since to them he symbolized the essence of good
government and prosperity.
       When Kitabatake studied under Bokuden, the latter passed on to him his
Supreme Swordsmanship: his most secret of secret methods. Bokuden's son,
Tsukahara Hikoshirō, inherited his father's name and estate but had not been
bequeathed his secret treasure. It was for this reason that Bokuden's style spread
not in the east, where Hikoshirō was active, but in the Kuwana region, where
Kitabatake ruled.
       Legend has it that after Bokuden's death, Hikoshirō came to Kuwana and
tried to trick Kitabatake into revealing the secret method to him. "My father," he
allegedly claimed, "long ago taught it to me, and I'm told he did the same with
you. But lately I've been wondering whether what we were taught was, in fact,
the same thing. Since the ultimate secrets of the Way are our mutual concern, I
think we should compare what we've learned, don't you?"
       Though Kitabatake immediately realized Bokuden's heir was up to no
good, he quickly agreed to a demonstration, but what Hikoshirō then became
privy to was only the outward form of the Supreme Swordsmanship, not its
innermost secret. As a result, Kitabatake remained the sole master of the true
Bokuden Style and to learn it students had to go to Kuwana. In the east,
Hikoshirō passed on as genuine the spurious hollow shell of his father's skill: its
form without its heart.
       Or such, in any case, was the story told to any traveler who happened to
set foot in the Kuwana region. It was not a bad story, as such stories go, and
being based on fact, it was both more plausible and less inconsequential than
most of the myriad local folk tales people told to reaffirm the uniqueness of their
beloved towns and provinces.
       Musashi, descending Tarusaka Mountain on his way from the castle town

of Kuwana, heard it from his groom. He nodded and said politely, "Really? How
interesting." It was the middle of the last month of the year, and though the Ise
climate is relatively warm, the wind blowing up into the pass from Nako inlet
was cold and biting.
        He wore only a thin kimono, a cotton undergarment and a sleeveless cloak,
clothing too light by any standard, and distinctly dirty as well. His face was not
so much bronzed as blackened from exposure to the sun. Atop his weather-
beaten head, his worn and frayed basket hat looked absurdly superfluous. Had he
discarded it along the road, no one would have bothered to pick it up. His hair,
which could not have been washed for many days, was tied in back, but still
managed to resemble a bird's nest. And whatever he had been doing for the past
six months had left his skin looking like well-tanned leather. His eyes shone
pearly white in their coal-dark setting.
        The groom had been worrying ever since he took on this unkempt rider. He
doubted he would ever receive his pay and was certain he would see no return
fare from their destination deep in the mountains.
        "Sir," he said, somewhat timidly.
        "Mm?"
        "We'll reach Yokkaichi a little before noon and Kameyama by evening, but
it'll be the middle of the night before we get to the village of Ujii."
        "Mm."
        "Is that all right?"
        "Mm." Musashi was more interested in the view of the inlet than in
talking, and the groom, try though he did, could elicit no more response than a
nod and a noncommittal "Mm."
        He tried again. "Ujii's nothing but a little hamlet about eight miles into the
mountains from the ridge of Mount Suzuka. How do you happen to be going to a
place like that?"
       "I'm going to see someone."
       "There's nobody there but a few farmers and woodcutters."
       "In Kuwana I heard there's a man there who's very good with the chain-ball-
       sickle."
       "I guess that would be Shishido."
       "That's the man. His name is Shishido something or other."
       "Shishido Baiken."
       "Yes."
        "He's a blacksmith, makes scythes. I remember hearing how good he is

with that weapon. Are you studying the martial arts?"
       "Mm."
       "Well, in that case, instead of going to see Baiken, I'd suggest you go to
Matsuzaka. Some of the best swordsmen in Ise Province are there."
       "Who, for instance?"
       "Well, there's Mikogami Tenzen, for one."
       Musashi nodded. "Yes, I've heard of him." He said no more, leaving the
impression that he was quite familiar with Mikogami's exploits.
       When they reached the little town of Yokkaichi, he limped painfully to a
stall, ordered a box lunch and sat down to eat. One of his feet was bandaged
around the instep, because of a festering wound on the sole, which explained
why he had chosen to rent a horse rather than walk. Despite his usual habit of
taking good care of his body, a few days earlier in the crowded port town of
Narumi, he had stepped on a board with a nail in it. His red and swollen foot
looked like a pickled persimmon, and since the day before, he had had a fever.
       To his way of thinking, he had had a battle with a nail, and the nail had
won. As a student of the martial arts, he was humiliated at having let himself be
taken unawares. "Is there no way to resist an enemy of this sort?" he asked
himself several times. "The nail was pointed upward and plainly visible. I
stepped on it because I was half asleep—no, blind, because my spirit is not yet
active throughout my whole body. What's more, I let the nail penetrate deep,
proof my reflexes are slow. If I'd been in perfect control, I would have noticed
the nail as soon as the bottom of my sandal touched it."
       His trouble, he concluded, was immaturity. His body and his sword were
still not one; though his arms grew stronger every day, his spirit and the rest of
his body were not in tune. It felt to him, in his self-critical frame of mind, like a
crippling deformity.
       Still, he did not feel he'd entirely wasted the past six months. After fleeing
from Yagyū, he had gone first to Iga, then up the Omi highroad, then through the
provinces of Mino and Owari. At every town, in every mountain ravine, he had
sought to master the true Way of the Sword. At times he felt he had brushed up
against it, but its secret remained elusive, something not to be found lurking in
either town or ravine.
       He couldn't remember how many warriors he had clashed with; there had
been dozens of them, all well-trained, superior swordsmen. It was not hard to
find able swordsmen. What was hard to find was a real man. While the world
was full of people, all too full, finding a genuine human being was not easy. In

his travels, Musashi had come to believe this very deeply, to the point of pain,
and it discouraged him. But then his mind always turned to Takuan, for there,
without doubt, was an authentic, unique individual.
       "I guess I'm lucky," thought Musashi. "At least I've had the good fortune to
know one genuine man. I must make sure the experience of having known him
bears fruit."
       Whenever Musashi thought of Takuan, a certain physical pain spread from
his wrists throughout his body. It was a strange feeling, a physiological memory
of the time when he had been bound fast to the cryptomeria branch. "Just wait!"
vowed Musashi. "One of these days, I'll tie Takuan up in that tree, and I'll sit on
the ground and preach the true way of life to him!" It was not that he resented
Takuan or had any desire for revenge. He simply wanted to show that the state of
being one could attain through the Way of the Sword was higher than anyone
could reach by practicing Zen. It made Musashi smile to think he might someday
turn the tables on the eccentric monk.
       It could happen, of course, that things would not go exactly as planned, but
supposing he did make great progress, and supposing he was eventually in a
position to tie Takuan up in the tree and lecture him; what would Takuan be able
to say then? Surely he would cry out for joy and proclaim, "It's magnificent! I'm
happy now."
       But no, Takuan would never be that direct. Being Takuan, he would laugh
and say, "Stupid! You're improving, but you're still stupid!"
       The actual words wouldn't really matter. The point was that Musashi felt,
in a curious way, that hitting Takuan over the head with his personal superiority
was something he owed to the monk, a kind of debt. The fantasy was innocent
enough; Musashi had set out upon a Way of his own and was discovering day by
day how infinitely long and difficult the path to true humanity is. When the
practical side of his nature reminded him of how much farther along that path
Takuan was than he, the fantasy vanished.
       It unsettled him even more to consider how immature and inept he was
compared to Sekishūsai. Thinking of the old Yagyū master both maddened and
saddened him, making him keenly aware of his own incompetence to speak of
the Way, the Art of War or anything else with any confidence.
       At times like this, the world, which he had once thought so full of stupid
people, seemed frighteningly large. But then life, Musashi would tell himself, is
not a matter of logic. The sword is not logic. What was important was not talk or
speculation but action. There may be other people much greater than he right

now, but he, too, could be great!
       When self-doubt threatened to overwhelm him, it was Musashi's habit to
make straight for the mountains, in whose seclusion he could live to himself. His
style of life there was evident from his appearance on returning to civilization—
his cheeks hollow as a deer's, his body covered with scratches and bruises, his
hair dry and stiff from long hours under a cold waterfall. He would be so dirty
from sleeping on the ground that the whiteness of his teeth seemed unearthly, but
these were mere superficialities. Inside he would be burning with a confidence
verging on arrogance and bursting with eagerness to take on a worthy adversary.
And it was this search for a test of mettle that always brought him down from the
mountains.
       He was on the road now because he wondered whether the chain-ball-
sickle expert of Kuwana might do. In the ten days left before his appointment in
Kyoto, he had time to go and find out whether Shishido Baiken was that rare
entity a real man, or just another of the multitude of rice-eating worms who
inhabit the earth.
       It was late at night before he reached his destination deep in the mountains.
After thanking the groom, he told him he was free to leave, but the groom said
that since it was so late he would prefer to accompany Musashi to the house he
was looking for and spend the night under the eaves. The next morning he could
go down from Suzuka Pass and, if he was lucky, pick up a return fare on the
way. Anyhow, it was too cold and dark to try making his way back before sunup.
       Musashi sympathized with him. They were in a valley enclosed on three
sides, and any way the groom went, he'd have to climb the mountains knee-deep
in snow. "In that case," said Musashi, "come with me."
      "To Shishido Baiken's house?"
      "Yes."
      "Thank you, sir. Let's see if we can find it."
       Since Baiken ran a smithy, any of the local farmers would have been able
to direct them to his place, but at this hour of the night, the whole village was in
bed. The only sign of life was the steady thud of a mallet beating on a fulling
block. Walking through the frigid air toward the sound, they eventually spied a
light.
       It turned out to be the blacksmith's house. In front was a pile of old metal
and the underside of the eaves was smoke-stained. At Musashi's command, the
groom pushed open the door and went in. There was a fire in the forge, and a
woman with her back to the flames was pounding cloth.

       "Good evening, ma'am! Oh! You've got a fire. That's wonderful!" The
groom made straight for the forge.
       The woman jumped at the sudden intrusion and dropped her work. "Who
in the world are you?" she asked.
       "Just a moment, I'll explain," he said, warming his hands. "I've brought a
man from a long way off who wants to meet your husband. We just got here. I'm
a groom from Kuwana."
       "Well, of all . . ." The woman looked sourly in Musashi's direction. The
frown on her face made it evident that she had seen more than enough shugyōsha
and had learned how to handle them. With a touch of arrogance, she said to him,
as though to a child, "Shut the door! The baby will catch cold with all that
freezing air blowing in."
       Musashi bowed and complied. Then, taking a seat on a tree stump beside
the forge, he surveyed his surroundings, from the blackened foundry area to the
three-room living space. On a board nailed to one section of the wall hung about
ten chain-ball-sickle weapons. He assumed that was what they were, since if the
truth be told, he'd never laid eyes on the device. As a matter of fact, another
reason for his having made the journey here was that he thought a student like
himself should become acquainted with every type of weapon. His eyes sparkled
with curiosity.
       The woman, who was about thirty and rather pretty, put down her mallet
and went back into the living area. Musashi thought perhaps she would bring
some tea, but instead she went to a mat where a small child was sleeping, picked
him up and began to suckle him.
       To Musashi she said, "I suppose you're another one of those young samurai
who come here to get bloodied up by my husband. If you are, you're in luck.
He's off on a trip, so you don't have to worry about getting killed." She laughed
merrily.
       Musashi did not laugh with her; he was thoroughly annoyed. He had not
come to this out-of-the-way village to be made fun of by a woman, all of whom,
he mused, tended to overestimate their husbands' status absurdly. This wife was
worse than most; she seemed to think her spouse the greatest man on earth.
     Not wanting to give offense, Musashi said, "I'm disappointed to learn that
     your husband's away. Where did he go?"
     "To the Arakida house."
     "Where's that?"
       "Ha, ha! You've come to Ise, and you don't even know the Arakida

family?" The baby at her breast began to fret, and the woman, forgetting about
her guests, started to sing a lullaby in the local dialect.


           Go to sleep, go to sleep.
           Sleeping babies are sweet.
           Babies who wake and cry are naughty,
           And they make their mothers cry too.


       Thinking he might at least learn something by taking a look at the
blacksmith's weapons, Musashi asked, "Are those the weapons your husband
wields so well?"
       The woman grunted, and when he asked to examine them, she nodded and
grunted again.
       He took one down from its hook. "So this is what they're like," he said,
half to himself. "I've heard people are using them a good deal these days." The
weapon in his hand consisted of a metal bar about a foot and a half long (easily
carried in one's obi), with a ring at one end to which a long chain was attached.
At the other end of the chain was a heavy metal ball, quite substantial enough to
crack a person's skull. In a deep groove on one side of the bar, Musashi could see
the back of a blade. As he pulled at it with his fingernails, it snapped out
sideways, like the blade of a sickle. With this, it would be a simple matter to cut
off an opponent's head.
       "I suppose you hold it like this," said Musashi, taking the sickle in his left
hand and the chain in his right. Imagining an enemy in front of him, he assumed
a stance and considered what movements would be necessary.
       The woman, who had turned her eyes from the baby's bed to watch, chided
him. "Not that way! That's terrible!" Stuffing her breast back in her kimono, she
came over to where he was standing. "If you do that, anyone with a sword can
cut you down with no trouble at all. Hold it this way."
       She snatched the weapon from his hands and showed him how to stand. It
made him queasy to see a woman take a battle stance with such a brutal-looking
weapon. He stared with open mouth. While nursing the baby, she had appeared
distinctly bovine, but now, ready for combat, she looked handsome, dignified
and, yes, beautiful. As Musashi watched, he saw that on the blade, which was
blackish blue like the back of a mackerel, there was an inscription reading "Style

of Shishido Yaegaki."
       She kept the stance only momentarily. "Well, anyway, it's something like
that," she said, folding the blade back into the handle and hanging the weapon on
its hook.
       Musashi would have liked to see her handle the device again, but she
obviously had no intention of doing so. After clearing up the fulling block, she
clattered about near the sink, evidently washing pots or preparing to cook
something.
       "If this woman can take a stance as imposing as that," thought Musashi,
"her husband must really be something to see." By this time he was nearly sick
with the desire to meet Baiken and quietly asked the groom about the Arakidas.
The groom, leaning against the wall and baking in the warmth of the fire,
mumbled that they were the family charged with guarding Ise Shrine.
       If this was true, Musashi thought, they would not be difficult to locate. He
resolved to do just that, then curled up on a mat by the fire and went to sleep.
       In the early morning, the blacksmith's apprentice got up and opened the
outside door to the smithy. Musashi got up too and asked the groom to take him
to Yamada, the town nearest Ise Shrine. The groom, satisfied because he'd been
paid the day before, agreed at once.
       By evening they had reached the long, tree-lined road that led to the
shrine. The teashops looked particularly desolate, even for winter. There were
few travelers, and the road itself was in poor condition. A number of trees blown
down by autumn storms were still lying where they had fallen.
       From the inn in Yamada, Musashi sent a servant to inquire at the Arakida
house whether Shishido Baiken was staying there. A reply came saying that
there must be some mistake; no one of that name was there. In his
disappointment, Musashi turned his attention to his injured foot, which had
swollen up considerably overnight.
       He was exasperated, for only a few days remained before he was due in
Kyoto. In the letter of challenge he had sent to the Yoshioka School from
Nagoya, he had given them the choice of any day during the first week of the
New Year. He couldn't very well beg off now because of a sore foot. And
besides, he had promised to meet Matahachi at the Gojō Avenue bridge.
       He spent the whole of the next day applying a remedy he had once heard
about. Taking the dregs left after making bean curd, he put them in a cloth sack,
squeezed the warm water out, and soaked his foot in it. Nothing happened, and
to make matters worse, the smell of the bean curd was nauseating. As he fretted

over his foot, he bemoaned his stupidity in making this detour to Ise. He should
have gone to Kyoto straight away.
       That night, with his foot wrapped up under the quilt, his fever shot higher
and the pain became unendurable. The next morning, he desperately tried more
prescriptions, including smearing on some oily medicine given him by the
innkeeper, who swore his family had used it for generations. Still the swelling
did not go down. The foot began to look to Musashi like a large, bloated wad of
bean curd and felt as heavy as a block of wood.
       The experience set him to thinking. He had never in his life been
bedridden for three days. Aside from having a carbuncle on his head as a child,
he couldn't remember ever having been ill.
       "Sickness is the worst kind of enemy," he reflected. "Yet I'm powerless in
its grip." Until now he had assumed his adversaries would be coming at him
from without, and the fact of being immobilized by a foe within was both novel
and thought-provoking.
       "How many more days are there in the year?" he wondered. "I can't just
stay here doing nothing!" As he lay there chafing, his ribs seemed to press in on
his heart, and his chest felt constricted. He kicked the quilt off his swollen foot.
"If I can't even beat this, how can I hope to overcome the whole House of
Yoshioka?"
       Thinking he would pin down and stifle the demon inside him, he forced
himself to sit on his haunches in formal style. It was painful, excruciatingly so.
He nearly fainted. He faced the window but closed his eyes, and quite some time
passed before the violent redness in his face began to subside and his head to
cool a bit. He wondered if the demon was yielding to his unflinching tenacity.
       Opening his eyes, he saw before him the forest around Ise Shrine. Beyond
the trees he could see Mount Mae, and a little to the east Mount Asama. Rising
above the mountains between these two was a soaring peak that looked down its
nose at its neighbors and stared insolently at Musashi.
       "It's an eagle," he thought, not knowing its name actually was Eagle
Mountain. The peak's arrogant appearance offended him; its haughty pose
taunted him until his fighting spirit was once again stirred. He could not help
thinking of Yagyū Sekishūsai, the old swordsman who resembled this proud
peak, and as time passed, it began to seem the peak was Sekishūsai, looking
down at him from above the clouds and laughing at his weakness and
insignificance.
       Staring at the mountain, he became for a time oblivious of his foot, but

presently the pain reasserted its claim on his consciousness. Had he rammed his
leg into the fire of the blacksmith's forge, it couldn't have hurt any more, he
thought bitterly. Involuntarily he drew the big round thing out from under him
and glared at it, unable to accept the fact that it was really a part of him.
       In a loud voice he summoned the maid. When she did not appear promptly,
he beat on the tatami with his fist. "Where is everybody?" he shouted. "I'm
leaving! Bring the bill! Fix me some food—some fried rice—and get me three
pairs of heavy straw sandals!"
       Soon he was out on the street, limping through the old marketplace where
the famous warrior Taira no Tadakiyo, the hero of the "Story of the Hōgen War,"
was supposed to have been born. But now little about it suggested a birthplace of
heroes; it was more like an open-air brothel, lined with tea stalls and teeming
with women. More temptresses than trees stood along the lane, calling out to
travelers and latching on to the sleeves of passing prospects, as they flirted,
coaxed and teased. To get to the shrine, Musashi had to literally push his way
through them, scowling and avoiding their impertinent stares. "What happened
to your foot?"
       "Shall I make it feel better?"
       "Here, let me rub it for you!"
       They pulled at his clothing, grabbed at his hands, grasped his wrists. "A
good-looking man won't get anywhere frowning like that!"
       Musashi reddened and stumbled along blindly. Utterly without defense
against this kind of attack, he apologized to some and made polite excuses to
others, which only made the women titter. When one of them said he was as
"cute as a baby panther," the assault of the whitened hands intensified. Finally,
he gave up all pretense of dignity and ran, not even stopping to retrieve his hat
when it flew off. The giggling voices followed him through the trees outside the
town.
       It was impossible for Musashi to ignore women, and the frenzy their
pawing hands aroused in him took long to subside. The mere memory of the
scent of pungent white powder would set his pulse racing, and no amount of
mental effort could calm it. It was a greater threat than an enemy standing with
sword drawn before him; he simply did not know how to cope with it. Later, his
body burning with sexual fire, he would toss and turn all night. Even innocent
Otsū sometimes became the object of his lustful fantasies.
       Today he had his foot to take his mind off the women, but running from
them when he was barely able to walk, he might as well have been crossing a

bed of molten metal. At every other step, a stab of anguish shot to his head from
the sole of his foot. His lips reddened, his hands grew as sticky as honey, and his
hair smelled acrid from sweat. Just lifting the injured foot took all the strength he
could muster; at times he felt as if his body would suddenly fall apart. Not that
he had any illusions. He knew when he left the inn that this would be torture and
he intended to survive it. Somehow he managed to stay in control, cursing under
his breath each time he dragged the wretched foot forward.
       Crossing the Isuzu River and entering the precincts of the Inner Shrine
brought a welcome change of atmosphere. He sensed a sacred presence, sensed it
in the plants, in the trees, even in the voices of the birds. What it was, he could
not say, but it was there.
       He groaned and collapsed on the roots of a great cryptomeria, whimpering
softly with pain and holding his foot in both hands. For a long time he sat there,
motionless as a rock, his body aflame with fever even as his skin was bitten by
the cold wind.
       Why had he suddenly risen from his bed and fled the inn? Any normal
person would have stayed there quietly until the foot healed. Was it not childish,
even imbecilic, for an adult to allow impatience to overcome him?
       But it was not impatience only that had moved him. It was a spiritual need,
and a very deep one. For all the pain, all the physical torment, his spirit was
tense and throbbing with vitality. He lifted his head and with keen eyes regarded
the nothingness around him.
       Through the bleak, ceaseless moaning of the great trees in the sacred
forest, Musashi's ear caught another sound. Somewhere, not far away, flutes and
reeds were giving voice to the strains of ancient music, music dedicated to the
gods, while ethereal children's voices sang a holy invocation. Drawn by this
peaceful sound, Musashi tried to stand. Biting his lips, he forced himself up, his
unwilling body resisting every move. Reaching the dirt wall of a shrine building,
he grasped it with both hands and worked his way along with an awkward
crablike movement.
       The heavenly music was coming from a building a little farther on, where
a light shone through a latticed window. This, the House of Virgins, was
occupied by young girls in the service of the deity. Here they practiced playing
ancient musical instruments and learned to perform sacred dances devised
centuries earlier.
       Musashi made his way to the rear entrance of the building. He paused and
looked in, but saw no one. Relieved at not having to explain himself, he removed

his swords and the pack on his back, tied them together, and hung them on a peg
on the inside wall. Thus unencumbered, he put his hands on his hips and began
hobbling back toward the Isuzu River.
       An hour or so later, completely naked, he broke the ice on the surface and
plunged into the frigid waters. And there he stayed, splashing and bathing,
dunking his head, purifying himself. Fortunately, no one was about; any passing
priest would have thought him insane and driven him away.
       According to Ise legend, an archer named Nikki Yoshinaga had, long ago,
attacked and occupied a part of the Ise Shrine territory. Once ensconced, he
fished in the sacred Isuzu River and used falcons to catch small birds in the
sacred forest. In the course of these sacrilegious plunderings, the legend said, he
went totally insane, and Musashi, acting as he was, could easily have been taken
for the madman's ghost.
       When finally he leaped onto a boulder, it was with the lightness of a small
bird. While he was drying himself and putting on his clothes, the strands of hair
along his forehead stiffened into slivers of ice.
       To Musashi, the icy plunge into the sacred stream was necessary. If his
body could not withstand the cold, how could it survive in the face of life's more
threatening obstacles? And at this moment, it was not a matter of some abstract
future contingency, but one of taking on the very real Yoshioka Seijūrō and his
entire school. They would hurl every bit of strength they had at him. They had
to, to save face. They knew they had no alternative but to kill him, and Musashi
knew just saving his skin was going to be tricky.
       Faced with this prospect, the typical samurai would invariably talk about
"fighting with all his might" or "being prepared to face death," but to Musashi's
way of thinking, this was a lot of nonsense. To fight a life-or-death struggle with
all one's might was no more than animal instinct. Moreover, while not being
thrown off balance by the prospect of death was a mental state of a higher order,
it was not really so difficult to face death if one knew that one had to die.
       Musashi was not afraid to die, but his objective was to win definitively, not
just survive, and he was trying to build up the confidence to do so. Let others die
heroic deaths, if that suited them. Musashi could settle for nothing less than a
heroic victory.
       Kyoto was not far away, no more than seventy or eighty miles. If he could
keep up a good pace, he could get there in three days. But the time needed to
prepare himself spiritually was beyond measuring. Was he inwardly ready? Were
his mind and spirit truly one?

       Musashi wasn't yet able to reply to these questions in the affirmative. He
felt that somewhere deep inside himself there was a weakness, the knowledge of
his immaturity. He was painfully aware that he had not attained the state of mind
of the true master, that he was still far short of being a complete and perfect
human. When he compared himself with Nikkan, or Sekishūsai, or Takuan, he
could not avoid the simple truth: he was still green. His own analysis of his
abilities and traits unveiled not only weaknesses in some areas but virtual blind
spots in others.
       But unless he could triumph throughout this life and leave an indelible
mark on the world around him, he could not regard himself as a master of the
Art of War.
       His body shook as he shouted, "I will win, I will!" Limping on toward the
upper reaches of the Isuzu, he cried out again for all the trees in the sacred forest
to hear: "I will win!" He passed a silent, frozen waterfall and, like a primitive
man, crawled over the boulders and pushed his way through thick groves in deep
ravines, where few had ever gone before.
       His face was as red as a demon's. Clinging to rocks and vines, he could
with the utmost effort advance only one step at a time.
       Beyond a point called Ichinose there was a gorge five or six hundred yards
long, so full of crags and rapids that even the trout could not make their way
through it. At the farther end rose an almost sheer precipice. It was said that only
monkeys and goblins could climb it. Musashi merely looked at the cliff and said
matter-of-factly, "This is it. This is the way to Eagle Mountain."
       Elated, he saw no impassable barrier here. Seizing hold of strong vines, he
started up the rock face, half climbing, half swinging, seemingly lifted by some
upside-down gravity.
       Having reached the cliff top, he exploded with a cry of triumph. From here
he could make out the white flow of the river and the silver strand along the
shore of Futamigaura. Ahead of him, through a sparse grove veiled in nocturnal
mist, he saw before his eyes the foot of Eagle Mountain.
       The mountain was Sekishūsai. As it had laughed while he'd lain in bed, the
peak continued to mock him now. His unyielding spirit felt literally assaulted by
Sekishūsai's superiority. It was oppressing him, holding him back.
       Gradually his objective took form: to climb to the top and unleash his
rancor, to trample roughshod on the head of Sekishūsai, to show him Musashi
could and would win.
       He advanced against the opposition of weeds, trees, ice—all enemies

trying desperately to keep him back. Every step, every breath, was a challenge.
His recently chilled blood boiled, and his body steamed as the sweat from his
pores met the frosty air. Musashi hugged the red surface of the peak, groping for
footholds. Each time he felt for a footing he had to struggle, and small rocks
would go crashing down to the grove below. One hundred feet, two hundred,
three hundred—he was in the clouds. When they parted, he appeared from below
to be hanging weightless in the sky. The mountain peak stared coldly down at
him.
        Now, nearing the top, he hung on for dear life. One false move and he
would come flying down in a cascade of rocks and boulders. He puffed and
grunted, gasping for air with his very pores. So intense was the strain, his heart
seemed about to rise up and explode from his mouth. He could climb but a few
feet, then rest, climb a few feet more, then rest again.
        The whole world lay beneath him: the great forest enclosing the shrine, the
white strip that must be the river, Mount Asama, Mount Mae, the fishing village
at Toba, the great open sea. "Almost there," he thought. "Just a little more!"
        "Just a little more." How easy to say, but how difficult to achieve! For "just
a little more" is what distinguishes the victorious sword from the vanquished.
        The odor of sweat in his nostrils, he felt giddily that he was nestled in his
mother's breast. The rough surface of the mountain began to feel like her skin,
and he experienced an urge to go to sleep. But just then a piece of rock under his
big toe broke off and brought him to his senses. He groped for another foothold.
        "This is it! I'm almost there!" Hands and feet knotted with pain, he clawed
again at the mountain. If his body or willpower weakened, he told himself, then
as a swordsman he would surely one day be done in. This was where the match
would be decided, and Musashi knew it.
        "This is for you, Sekishūsai! You bastard!" With every pull and tug, he
execrated the giants he respected, those supermen who had brought him here and
whom he must and would conquer. "One for you, Nikkan! and you, Takuan!"
        He was climbing over the heads of his idols, trampling over them, showing
them who was best. He and the mountain were now one, but the mountain, as if
astonished to have this creature clawing into it, snarled and spit out regular
avalanches of gravel and sand. Musashi's breath stopped as though someone had
clapped his hands over his face. As he clung to the rock, the wind gusted,
threatening to blow him away, rock and all.
        Then suddenly he was lying on his stomach, his eyes closed, not daring to
move. But in his heart he sang a song of exultation. At the moment when he had

flattened out, he had seen the sky in all directions, and the light of dawn was
suddenly visible in the white sea of clouds below.
       "I've done it! I've won!"
       The instant he realized he had reached the top, his strained willpower
snapped like a bowstring. The wind at the summit showered his back with sand
and stones. Here at the border of heaven and earth, Musashi felt an indescribable
joy swelling out to fill his whole being. His sweat-drenched body united with the
surface of the mountain; the spirit of man and the spirit of the mountain were
performing the great work of procreation in the vast expanse of nature at dawn.
Wrapped in an unearthly ecstasy, he slept the sleep of peace.
       When he finally lifted his head, his mind was as pure and clear as crystal.
He had the impulse to jump and dart about like a minnow in a stream.
       "There's nothing above me!" he cried. "I'm standing on top of the eagle's
head!"
       The pristine morning sun cast its reddish light on him and on the mountain
as he stretched his brawny, savage arms toward the sky. He looked down at his
two feet planted firmly on the summit, and as he looked, he saw what seemed
like a bucketful of yellowish pus stream from his injured foot. Amid the celestial
purity surrounding him, there arose the strange odor of humanity—the sweet
smell of gloom dispelled.
