The Great Bridge at Gojō Avenue
       "Field of the Rendaiji ... ninth day of the first month . . ."
       Reading the words made Musashi's blood surge.
       His attention was distracted, however, by a sharp, stabbing pain in his left
eye. Lifting his hand to his eyelid, he noticed a small needle stuck into his
kimono sleeve, and a closer look revealed four or five more embedded in his
clothing, shining like slivers of ice in the morning light.
       "So that's it!" he exclaimed, pulling one out and examining it. It was about
the size of a small sewing needle but had no threading eye and was triangular
instead of round. "Why, the old bitch!" he said with a shudder, glancing down
toward the boat. "I've heard about blow needles, but whoever would have
thought the old hag could shoot them? That was a pretty close call."
       With his usual curiosity, he gathered the needles one by one, then pinned
them securely into his collar with the intention of studying them later on. He'd
heard that among warriors there were two opposing schools of thought regarding
these small weapons. One held that they could be effectively employed as a
deterrent by blowing them into an enemy's face, while the other maintained that
this was nonsense.
       The proponents held that a very old technique for the needles' employment
had been developed from a game played by seamstresses and weavers who
migrated from China to Japan in the sixth or seventh century. Although it was
not considered a method of attack per se, they explained, it was practiced, up
until the time of the Ashikaga shogunate, as a preliminary means of fending off
an adversary.
       Those on the other side of the fence went so far as to claim that no ancient
technique ever existed, although they did admit that needle-blowing had been
practiced as a game at one time. While conceding that women may have amused
themselves in this fashion, they adamantly denied that needle-blowing could be
refined to the degree necessary to inflict injury. They also pointed out that saliva
could absorb a certain amount of heat, cold or acidity, but it could do little to
absorb the pain caused by needles puncturing the inside of a person's mouth. The
reply to this, of course, was that with enough practice, a person could learn to
hold the needles in the mouth painlessly and to manipulate them with the tongue
with a great deal of precision and force. Enough to blind a man.
       The nonbelievers then countered that even if the needles could be blown
hard and fast, the chances of hurting anyone were minimal. After all, they said,

the only parts of the face vulnerable to such attack were the eyes, and the
chances of hitting them weren't very good, even under the best conditions. And
unless the needle penetrated the pupil, the damage would be insignificant.
       After hearing most of these arguments at one time or another, Musashi had
been inclined to side with the doubters. After this experience, he realized how
premature his judgment had been and how important and useful randomly
acquired bits of knowledge could subsequently prove to be.
       The needles had missed his pupil, but his eye was watering. As he felt
around his clothing for something to dry it with, he heard the sound of cloth
being torn. Turning, he saw a girl ripping a foot or so of red fabric from the
sleeve of her undergarment.
       Akemi came running toward him. Her hair was not done up for the New
Year's celebration, and her kimono was bedraggled. She wore sandals, but no
socks. Musashi squinted at her and muttered; though she looked familiar, he
couldn't place the face.
       "It's me, Takezō ... I mean Musashi," she said hesitantly, offering him the
red cloth. "Did you get something in your eye? You shouldn't rub it. That'll only
make it worse. Here, use this."
      Musashi silently accepted her kindness and covered his eye with the cloth.
      Then he stared at her face intently.
      "Don't you remember me?" she said incredulously. "But you must!"
      Musashi's face was a perfect blank.
      "You must!"
       His silence broke the dam holding back her long-pent-up emotions. Her
spirit, so accustomed to unhappiness and cruelty, had clung to this one last hope,
and now the light was dawning that it was nothing more than a fantasy of her
own making. A hard lump formed in her breast, and she made a choking sound.
Though she covered her mouth and nose to suppress the sobs, her shoulders
quivered uncontrollably.
       Something about the way she looked when crying recalled the innocent
girlishness of the days in Ibuki, when she'd carried the tinkling bell in her obi.
Musashi put his arms around her thin, weak shoulders.
       "You're Akemi, of course. I remember. How do you happen to be here? It's
such a surprise to see you! Don't you live in Ibuki anymore? What happened to
your mother?" His questions were like barbs, the worst being the mention of
Okō, which led naturally to his old friend. "Are you still living with Matahachi?
He was supposed to come here this morning. You haven't by any chance seen

him, have you?"
       Every word added to Akemi's misery. Nestled in his arms, she could do no
more than shake her weeping head.
       "Isn't Matahachi coming?" he persisted. "What happened to him? How will
I ever know if you just stand here and cry?"
       "He ... he ... he's not coming. He never ... he never got your message."
Akemi pressed her face against Musashi's chest and went into a new spasm of
tears.
       She thought of saying this, of saying that, but each idea died in her
feverish brain. How could she tell him of the horrid fate she had suffered
because of her mother? How could she put into words what had happened in
Sumiyoshi or in the days since then?
       The bridge was bathed in the New Year's sun, and more and more people
were passing by—girls in bright new kimono going to make their New Year's
obeisance at Kiyomizudera, men in formal robes starting their rounds of New
Year's calls. Almost hidden among them was Jōtarō, his gnomish thatch of hair
in the same disheveled state as on any other day. He was nearly in the middle of
the bridge when he caught sight of Musashi and Akemi.
       "What's all this?" he asked himself. "I thought he'd be with Otsū. That's
not Otsū!" He stopped and made a peculiar face.
       He was shocked to the core. It might have been all right if no one were
watching, but there they were chest to chest, embracing each other on a busy
thoroughfare. A man and a woman hugging each other in public? It was
shameless. He couldn't believe any grownup could act so disgracefully, much
less his own, revered sensei. Jōtarō's heart throbbed violently, he was both sad
and a little jealous. And angry, so angry that he wanted to pick up a rock and
throw it at them.
       "I've seen that woman somewhere," he thought. "Ah! She's the one who
took Musashi's message for Matahachi. Well, she's a teahouse girl, so what could
you expect? But how on earth did they get to know one another? I think I should
tell Otsū about this!"
       He looked up and down the street and peered over the railing, but there
was no sign of her.
       The previous night, confident that she would be meeting Musashi the next
day, Otsū had washed her hair and stayed up till the early hours doing it up in
proper fashion. Then she had put on a kimono given her by the Karasumaru
family and, before dawn, set out to pay her respects at Gion Shrine and

Kiyomizudera before proceeding to Gojō Avenue. Jōtarō had wanted to
accompany her, but she had refused.
       Normally it would be all right, she had explained, but today Jōtarō would
be in the way. "You stay here," she said. "First I want to talk to Musashi alone.
You can come along to the bridge after it gets light, but take your time. And
don't worry; I promise I'll be waiting there with Musashi when you come."
       Jōtarō had been more than a little peeved. Not only was he old enough to
understand Otsū's feelings; he also had a certain appreciation of the attraction
men and women felt for each other. The experience of rolling about in the straw
with Kocha in Koyagyū had not faded from his mind. Even so, it remained a
mystery to him why a grown woman like Otsū went around moping and weeping
all the time over a man.
       Search as he might, he could not find Otsū. While he fretted, Musashi and
Akemi moved to the end of the bridge, presumably to avoid being so
conspicuous. Musashi folded his arms and leaned on the railing. Akemi, at his
side, looked down at the river. They did not notice Jōtarō when he slipped by on
the opposite side of the bridge.
       "Why is she taking so much time? How long can you pray to Kannon?"
Grumbling to himself, Jōtarō stood on tiptoe and strained his eyes toward the hill
at the end of Gojō Avenue.
       About ten paces from where he was standing, there were four or five
leafless willow trees. Often a flock of white herons gathered here along the river
to catch fish, but today none were to be seen. A young man with a long forelock
leaned against a willow branch, which stretched out toward the ground like a
sleeping dragon.
       On the bridge, Musashi nodded as Akemi whispered fervently to him. She
had thrown pride to the winds and was telling him everything in the hope that
she could persuade him to be hers alone. It was difficult to discern whether her
words penetrated beyond his ears. Nod though he might, his look was not that of
a lover saying sweet nothings to his beloved. On the contrary, his pupils shone
with a colorless, heatless radiance and focused steadily on some particular
object.
       Akemi did not notice this. Completely absorbed, she seemed to choke
slightly as she tried to analyze her feelings.
       "Oh," she sighed, "I've told you everything there is to tell. I haven't hidden
anything." Edging closer to him, she said wistfully, "It's been more than four
years since Sekigahara. I've changed both in body and in spirit." Then, with a

burst of tears: "No! I haven't really changed. My feeling toward you hasn't
changed a bit. I'm absolutely sure of that! Do you understand, Musashi? Do you
understand how I feel?"
       "Mm."
       "Please try to understand! I've told you everything. I'm not the innocent
wild flower I was when we met at the foot of Mount Ibuki. I'm just an ordinary
woman who's been violated.... But is chastity a thing of the body, or of the mind?
Is a virgin who has lewd thoughts really chaste? ... I lost my virginity to—I can't
say his name, but to a certain man—and yet my heart is pure."
       "Mm. Mm."
       "Don't you feel anything for me at all? I can't keep secrets from the person
I love. I wondered what to say when I saw you: should I say anything or not?
But then it became clear. I couldn't deceive you even if I wanted to. Please
understand! Say something! Say you forgive me. Or do you consider me
despicable?"
       "Mm. Ah . . ."
       "When I think of it again, it makes me so furious!" She put her face down
on the railing. "You see, I'm ashamed to ask you to love me. I haven't the right to
do that. But ... but ... I'm still a virgin at heart. I still treasure my first love like a
pearl. I haven't lost that treasure, and I won't, no matter what kind of life I lead,
or what men I'm thrown together with!"
       Each hair of her head trembled with her sobbing. Under the bridge where
her tears fell, the river, glistening in the New Year's sun, flowed on like Akemi's
dreams toward an eternity of hope.
       "Mm." While the poignance of her story elicited frequent nods and grunts,
Musashi's eyes remained fixed on that point in the distance. His father had once
remarked, "You're not like me. My eyes are black, but yours are dark brown.
They say your granduncle, Hirata Shōgen, had terrifying brown eyes, so maybe
you take after him." At this moment, in the slanting rays of the sun, Musashi's
eyes were a pure and flawless coral.
       "That has to be him," thought Sasaki Kojirō, the man leaning against the
willow. He had heard of Musashi many times, but this was the first time he had
set eyes on him.
       Musashi was wondering: "Who could he be?"
       From the instant their eyes met, they had silently been searching, each
sounding the depths of the other's spirit. In practicing the Art of War, it is said
that one must discern from the point of the enemy's sword the extent of his

ability. This is exactly what the two men were doing. They were like wrestlers,
sizing each other up before coming to grips. And each had reasons to regard the
other with suspicion.
       "I don't like it," thought Kojirō, seething with displeasure. He had taken
care of Akemi since rescuing her from the deserted Amida Hall, and this patently
intimate conversation between her and Musashi upset him. "Maybe he's the kind
who preys on innocent women. And her! She didn't say where she was going,
and now she's up there weeping on a man's shoulder!" He himself was here
because he'd followed her.
       The enmity in Kojirō's eyes was not lost on Musashi, and he was also
conscious of that peculiar instant conflict of wills that arises when one
shugyōsha encounters another. Nor was there any doubt that Kojirō felt the spirit
of defiance conveyed in Musashi's expression.
       "Who could he be?" thought Musashi again. "He looks like quite a fighter.
But why the malicious look in his eye? Better watch him closely."
       The intensity of the two men came not from their eyes but from deep
inside. Fireworks seemed about to shoot from their pupils. From appearances,
Musashi might be a year or two younger than Kojirō, but then again it might be
the other way around. In either case, they shared one similarity: both were at that
age of maximum impudence when they were certain they knew everything there
was to know about politics, society, the Art of War and all other subjects. As a
vicious dog snarls when it sees another vicious dog, so both Musashi and Kojirō
knew instinctively that the other was a dangerous fighter.
       Kojirō was the first to disengage his eyes, which he did with a slight grunt.
Musashi, despite the touch of contempt he could see in Kojirō's profile, was
convinced deep down that he'd won. The opponent had given in to his eyes, to
his willpower, and this made Musashi happy.
       "Akemi," he said, putting his hand on her shoulder.
       Still sobbing with her face to the railing, she did not reply.
       "Who's that man over there? He's somebody who knows you, isn't he? I
mean the young man who looks like a student warrior. Just who is he?"
       Akemi was silent. She had not seen Kojirō until now, and the sight threw
her tear-swollen face into confusion. "Uh ... you mean that tall man over there?"
      "Yes. Who is he?"
      "Oh, he's ... well ... he's ... I don't know him very well."
      "But you do know him, don't you?"
      "Uh, yes."

       "Carrying that great long sword and dressed to attract attention—he must
think he's quite a swordsman! How do you happen to know him?"
       "A few days ago," Akemi said quickly, "I was bitten by a dog, and the
bleeding wouldn't stop, so I went to a doctor in the place where he happened to
be staying. He's been looking after me the past few days."
      "In other words, you're living in the same house with him?"
      "Yes, well, I'm living there, but it doesn't mean anything. There's nothing
      between us." She spoke with more force now.
      "In that case, I suppose you don't know much about him. Do you know his
      name?"
      "His name is Sasaki Kojirō. He's also called Ganryū."
       "Ganryū?" He had heard that name before. Though not exceptionally
famous, it was known among the warriors in a number of provinces. He was
younger than Musashi had imagined him to be; he took another look at him.
       An odd thing happened then. A pair of dimples appeared in Kojirō's
cheeks.
       Musashi smiled back. Yet this silent communication was not full of
peaceful light and friendship, like the smile exchanged between the Buddha and
his disciple Ananda as they rubbed flowers between their fingers. In Kojirō's
smile were both a challenging jeer and an element of irony.
       Musashi's smile not only accepted Kojirō's challenge but conveyed a fierce
will to fight.
       Caught between these two strong-willed men, Akemi was about to start
pouring out her feelings again, but before it came to that, Musashi said, "Now,
Akemi, I think it'd be best for you to go back with that man to your lodgings. I'll
come to see you soon. Don't worry."
      "You'll really come?"
      "Why, yes, of course."
      "The name of the inn, it's the Zuzuya, in front of the Rokujō Avenue
      monastery."
      "I see."
       The casual manner of his reply was not enough for Akemi. She grabbed
his hand from the railing and squeezed it passionately in the shadow of her
sleeve. "You'll really come, won't you? Promise?"
       Musashi's reply was drowned by a burst of belly-splitting laughter.
       "Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! Oh! Ha, ha, ha, ha! Oh ..." Kojirō turned his back and
walked away as best he could in view of his uncontrollable mirth.

       Looking on acidly from one end of the bridge, Jōtarō thought: "Nothing
could possibly be that funny!" He himself was disgusted with the world, and
particularly with his wayward teacher and with Otsū.
       "Where could she have got to?" he asked again as he started tramping
angrily toward town. He had taken only a few steps when he spied Otsū's white
face between the wheels of an oxcart standing at the next corner over. "There she
is!" he shouted, then bumped into the ox's nose in his hurry to reach her.
       Today, for a change, Otsū had applied a little rouge to her lips. Her makeup
was somewhat amateurish, but there was a pleasant scent about her, and her
kimono was a lovely spring outfit with a white and green pattern embroidered on
a deep pink background. Jōtarō hugged her from behind, not caring whether he
mussed her hair or smeared the white powder on her neck.
       "Why are you hiding here? I’ve been waiting for hours. Come with me,
quick!"
       She made no reply.
       "Come on, right now!" he pleaded, shaking her by the shoulders.
"Musashi's here too. Look, you can see him from here. I'm mad at him myself,
but let's go anyway. If we don't hurry, he'll be gone!" When he took her wrist and
tried to pull her to her feet, he noticed her arm was damp. "Otsū! Are you
crying?"
      "Jō, hide behind the wagon like me. Please!"
      "Why?"
      "Never mind why!"
       "Well, of all—" Jōtarō made no attempt to conceal his wrath. "That's what
I hate about women. They do crazy things! You keep saying you want to see
Musashi and go weeping all over the place looking for him. Now that he's right
in front of you, you decide to hide. You even want me to hide with you! Isn't that
funny? Ha— Oh, I can't even laugh."
       The words stung like a whip. Lifting her swollen red eyes, she said,
"Please don't talk that way. I beg you. Don't you be mean to me too!"
       "Why accuse me of being mean? What have I done?"
       "Just be quiet, please. And stoop down here with me."
       "I can't. There's ox manure on the ground. You know, they say if you cry
on New Year's Day, even the crows will laugh at you."
       "Oh, I don't care. I'm just—"
       "Well, then, I'll laugh at you! Laugh like that samurai a few minutes ago.
My first laugh of the New Year. Would that suit you?"

        "Yes. Laugh! Laugh hard!"
        "I can't," he said, wiping his nose. "I'll bet I know what's wrong. You're
jealous because Musashi was talking to that woman."
        "It's . .. it's not that! It's not that at all!"
        "Yes it is! I know it is. It made me mad too. But isn't that all the more
reason for you to go and talk to him? You don't understand anything, do you?"
        Otsū showed no signs of rising, but he tugged so hard at her wrist that she
was forced to. "Stop!" she cried. "That hurts! Don't be so spiteful. You say I
don't understand anything, but you don't have the slightest idea how I feel."
       "I know exactly how you feel. You're jealous!"
       "That's not the only thing."
       "Quiet. Let's go!"
        She emerged from behind the wagon, but not voluntarily. The boy pulled;
her feet scraped the ground. Still tugging, Jōtarō craned his neck and looked
toward the bridge.
        "Look!" he said. "Akemi's not there anymore."
        "Akemi? Who's Akemi?"
        "The girl Musashi was talking to.... Oh, oh! Musashi's walking away. If
you don't come right now, he'll be gone." Jōtarō let go of Otsū and started toward
the bridge.
        "Wait!" cried Otsū, sweeping the bridge with her eyes to make sure Akemi
wasn't lurking about somewhere. Assured that her riyal was really gone, she
appeared immensely relieved and her eyebrows unfurrowed. But back she went,
behind the oxcart, to dry her puffy eyes with her sleeve, smooth her hair and
straighten her kimono.
        "Hurry, Otsū!" Jōtarō called impatiently. "Musashi seems to have gone
down to the riverbank. This is no time to primp!"
        "Where?"
        "Down to the riverbank. I don't know why, but that's where he went." The
two of them ran together to the end of the bridge, and Jōtarō, with
        perfunctory apologies, made a way for them through the crowd to the
railing. Musashi was standing by the boat where Osugi was still squirming
around,
        trying to free her bonds.
        "I'm sorry, Granny," he said, "but it seems Matahachi's not coming after
all. I hope to see him in the near future and try to drum some courage into him.
In the meantime, you yourself should try to find him and take him home to live

with you, like a good son. That'd be a far better way to express your gratitude to
your ancestors than by trying to cut off my head."
      He put his hand under the rush mats and with a small knife cut the rope.
      "You talk too much, Musashi! I don't need any advice from you. Just make
up your stupid mind what you're going to do. Are you going to kill me or be
killed?"
      Bright blue veins stood out all over her face as she struggled out from
under the mats, but by the time she stood up, Musashi was crossing the river,
jumping like a wagtail across the rocks and shoals. In no time he reached the
opposite side and climbed to the top of the dike.
      Jōtarō caught sight of him and cried, "See, Otsū! There he is!" The boy
went straight down the dike, and she did the same.
      To Jōtarō's nimble legs, rivers and mountains meant nothing, but Otsū,
because of her fine kimono, came to a dead halt at the river's edge. Musashi was
now out of sight, but there she stood, screaming his name at the top of her lungs.
      "Otsū!" came a reply from an unexpected quarter. Osugi was not a hundred
feet away.
      When Otsū saw who it was, she uttered a cry, covered her face with her
hands for a moment and ran.
      The old woman lost no time in giving chase, white hair flying in the wind.
"Otsū!" she screamed, in a voice that might have parted the waters of the Kamo.
"Wait! I want to talk to you."
      An explanation for Otsū's presence was already taking shape in the old
woman's suspicious mind. She felt sure Musashi had tied her up because he had
a rendezvous with the girl today and had not wanted her to see this. Then, she
reasoned, something Otsū said had annoyed him, and he had abandoned her.
That, no doubt, was why she was wailing for him to come back.
      "That girl is incorrigible!" she said, hating Otsū even more than she hated
Musashi. In her mind, Otsū was rightfully her daughter-in-law, never mind
whether the nuptials had actually taken place or not. The promise had been
made, and if his fiancée had come to hate her son, she must also hate Osugi
herself.
      "Wait!" she shrieked again, opening her mouth almost from ear to ear.
      The force of the scream startled Jōtarō, who was right beside her. He
      grabbed hold of her and shouted, "What are you trying to do, you old
witch?" "Get out of my way!" cried Osugi, shoving him aside.
      Jōtarō did not know who she was, or why Otsū had fled at the sight of her,

but he sensed that she meant danger. As the son of Aoki Tanzaemon and the sole
student of Miyamoto Musashi, he refused to be pushed aside by an old hag's
scrawny elbow.
       "You can't do that to me!" He caught up with her and leapt squarely on her
back.
       She quickly shook him off, and taking his neck in the crook of her left
arm, dealt him several sharp slaps. "You little devil! This'll teach you to butt in!"
       While Jōtarō struggled to free himself, Otsū ran on, her mind in turmoil.
She was young, and like most young people, full of hope, not in the habit of
bemoaning her unhappy lot. She savored the delights of each new day as though
they were flowers in a sunny garden. Sorrows and disappointments were facts of
life, but they did not get her down for long. Likewise, she could not conceive of
pleasure as completely divorced from pain.
       But today she had been jolted out of her optimism, not once but twice.
Why, she wondered, had she ever come here this morning?
       Neither tears nor anger could nullify the shock. After thinking fleetingly of
suicide, she had condemned all men as wicked liars. She had been by turns
furious and miserable, hating the world, hating herself, too overcome to find
release in tears or to think clearly about anything. Her blood boiled with
jealousy, and the insecurity it caused made her scold herself for her many
shortcomings, including her lack of poise at the moment. She told herself
repeatedly to keep cool and gradually repressed her impulses beneath the veneer
of dignity that women were supposed to maintain.
       The entire time that strange girl was at Musashi's side, Otsū had not been
able to move. When Akemi left, however, forbearance was no longer possible
and Otsū felt irresistibly compelled to face Musashi and pour out how she felt.
Although she had no idea where to begin, she resolved to open her heart and tell
him everything.
       But life is full of tiny accidents. One small misstep—a minute
miscalculation made in the heat of the moment—can, in many instances, alter
the shape of things to come for months or years. It was by letting Musashi out of
her sight for a second that Otsū exposed herself to Osugi, On this glorious New
Year's morning, Otsū's garden of delights was overrun by snakes.
       It was a nightmare come true. In many a frenzied dream, she had
encountered Osugi's leering face, and here was the stark reality bearing down on
her.
       Completely winded after running several hundred yards, she halted and

looked back. For a moment, her breath stopped altogether. Osugi, about a
hundred yards away, was hitting Jōtarō and swinging him around, this way and
that.
       He fought back, kicking the ground, kicking the air, landing an occasional
blow on his captor.
       Otsū saw that it would be only a matter of moments before he succeeded in
drawing his wooden sword. And when he did, it was a dead certainty the old
woman would not only unsheath her short sword but show no compunction
about using it. At a time like this, Osugi was not one to show mercy. Jōtarō
might well be killed.
       Otsū was in a terrible predicament: Jōtarō had to be rescued, but she dared
not approach Osugi.
       Jōtarō did succeed in getting his wooden sword free of his obi but not in
extracting his head from Osugi's viselike grip. All his kicking and flailing were
working against him, because they increased the old woman's self-confidence.
       "Brat!" she cried snidely. "What're you trying to do, imitate a frog?" The
way her front teeth jutted out made her look harelipped, but her expression was
one of hideous triumph. Step by scraping step, she pressed on toward Otsū.
       As she glared at the terrified girl, her natural cunning asserted itself. In a
flash it came to her that she was going about this the wrong way. If the opponent
had been Musashi, trickery would not work, but the enemy before her was Otsū
—tender, innocent Otsū—who could probably be made to believe anything,
provided it was put to her gently and with an air of sincerity. First tie her up with
words, thought Osugi, then roast her for dinner.
       "Otsū!" she called in an earnestly poignant tone. "Why are you running
away? What makes you flee the minute you lay eyes on me? You did the same
thing at the Mikazuki Teahouse. I can't understand it. You must be imagining
things. I haven't the slightest intention of doing you any harm."
      An expression of doubt crept over Otsū's face, but Jōtarō, still captive,
      asked, "Is that true, Granny? Do you mean it?"
      "Why, of course. Otsū doesn't understand how I really feel. She seems to be
      afraid of me."
      "If you mean that, let go of me, and I'll go get her."
      "Not so fast. If I let you go, how do I know you won't hit me with that
      sword of yours and run away?"
       "Do you think I'm a coward? I'd never do anything like that. It looks to me
as though we're fighting over nothing. There's been a mistake somewhere."

        "All right. You go to Otsū and tell her I'm not angry at her anymore. There
was a time when I was, but that's all over. Since Uncle Gon died, I've been
wandering around all by myself, carrying his ashes at my side—a lonely old lady
with no place to go. Explain to her that whatever my feelings about Musashi, I
still look upon her as a daughter. I'm not asking her to come back and be
Matahachi's bride. I only hope she'll take pity on me and listen to what I have to
say."
        "That's enough. Any more and I won't be able to remember it all." "All
right, just tell her what I've said so far."
        While the boy ran to Otsū and repeated Osugi's message, the old woman,
pretending not to watch, sat down on a rock and gazed toward a shoal where a
school of minnows were making patterns in the water. Would Otsū come, or
would she not? Osugi stole a glance, faster than the lightning movements of the
tiny fish.
        Otsū's doubts were not easily dispelled, but eventually Jōtarō convinced
her there was no danger. Timidly she began walking toward Osugi, who,
reveling in her victory, smiled broadly.
        "Otsū, my dear girl," she said in a motherly tone.
        "Granny," replied Otsū, bowing to the ground at the old woman's feet.
"Forgive me. Please, forgive me. I don't know what to say."
        "There's no need for you to say anything. It's all Matahachi's fault.
Apparently he still resents your change of heart, and at one time I'm afraid I
thought ill of you too. But that's all water under the bridge."
       "Then you'll pardon me for the way I acted?"
       "Well, now," said Osugi, introducing a note of uncertainty, but at the same
       time squatting down beside Otsū.
       Otsū picked at the sand with her fingers, scratching a small hole in the cold
       surface. Tepid water bubbled to the surface.
        "As Matahachi's mother, I suppose I can say that you've been forgiven, but
then there's Matahachi to consider. Won't you see him and talk to him again?
Since he ran off with another woman of his own free will, I don't think he'd ask
you to come back to him. In fact, I wouldn't permit him to do anything so selfish,
but ... "
        "Yes?"
        "Well, won't you at least agree to seeing him? Then, with the two of you
there side by side, I'll tell him exactly what's what. That way, I'll be able to fulfill
my duty as a mother. I'll feel I've done everything I could."

       "I see," replied Otsū. From the sand beside her, a baby crab crawled out
and scurried behind a rock. Jōtarō latched on to it, went behind Osugi and
dropped it on the top of her head.
      Otsū said, "But I can't help feeling that after all this time it would be better
      for me not to see Matahachi."
      "I'll be right there with you. Wouldn't you feel better if you saw him and
      made a clean break of it?"
      "Yes, but—"
      "Then do it. I say this for the sake of your own future."
       "If I agree ... how are we to find Matahachi? Do you know where he is?" "I
can, uh, I can find him very quickly. Very quickly. You see, I saw him quite
recently in Osaka. He got into one of his willful moods and went off and left me
in Sumiyoshi, but when he does things like that, he always regrets them later. It
won't be long before he shows up in Kyoto looking for me."
       Despite Otsū's uncomfortable feeling that Osugi wasn't telling the truth,
she was swayed by the old woman's faith in her worthless son. What led to her
final surrender, however, was the conviction that the course proposed by Osugi
was right and proper. "How would it be," she asked, "if I went and helped you
look for Matahachi?"
       "Oh, would you?" cried Osugi, taking the girl's hand in her own. "Yes. Yes,
I think I should."
       "All right, come with me now to my inn. Ouch! What's this?" Standing up,
she put her hand to the back of her collar and caught the crab. With a shiver, she
exclaimed, "Now, how did that get there?" She held out her hand and shook it
loose from her fingers.
       Jōtarō, who was behind her, suppressed a snicker, but Osugi was not
fooled. With flashing eyes, she turned and glared at him. "Some of your
mischief, I suppose!"
       "Not me. I didn't do it." He ran up the dike for safety and called, "Otsū, are
you going with her to her inn?"
       Before Otsū could answer for herself, Osugi said, "Yes, she's coming with
me. I'm staying at an inn near the foot of Sannen Hill. I always stay there when I
come to Kyoto. We won't be needing you. You go back to wherever you came
from."
       "All right, I'll be at the Karasumaru house. You come too, Otsū, when
you've finished your business."
       Otsū felt a twinge of anxiety. "Jō, wait!" She ran quickly up the dike,

reluctant to let him go. Osugi, fearing the girl might change her mind and flee,
was quick to follow, but for a few seconds Otsū and Jōtarō were alone.
       "I think I ought to go with her," said Otsū. "But I'll come to Lord
Karasumaru's whenever I have a chance. Explain everything to them, and get
them to let you stay until I've finished what I have to do."
      "Don't worry. I'll wait as long as necessary."
      "Look for Musashi while you're waiting, won't you?"
      "There you go again! When you finally find him, you hide. And now you're
      sorry. Don't say I didn't warn you."
      "It was very foolish of me."
       Osugi arrived and inserted herself between the two. The trio started
walking back to the bridge, Osugi's needlelike glance darting frequently toward
Otsū, whom she dared not trust. Although Otsū had not the slightest inkling of
the perilous fate that lay before her, she nevertheless had the feeling of being
trapped.
       When they arrived back at the bridge, the sun was high above the willows
and the pines and the streets well filled with the New Year's throng. A sizable
group had congregated before the sign posted on the bridge.
      "Musashi? Who's that?"
      "Do you know any great swordsman by that name?"
      "Never heard of him."
      "Must be quite a fighter if he's taking on the Yoshiokas. That should be
      something to see."
       Otsū came to a halt and stared. Osugi and Jōtarō, too, stopped and looked,
listening to the softly reverberating whisper. Like the ripples caused by minnows
in the shoal, the name Musashi spread through the crowd.
