Reunion in Osaka


       The field lay under a gray mist, and the chill in the early morning air
hinted that autumn was beginning in earnest. Squirrels were up and about, and in
the doorless kitchen of the deserted house, fresh fox tracks crossed the earthen
floor.
       The beggar priest, having stumbled back before sunrise, had succumbed to
fatigue on the pantry floor, still clutching his shakuhachi. His dirty kimono and
cassock were wet with dew and spotty with grass stains picked up while he
wandered like a lost soul through the night. As he opened his eyes and sat up, his
nose crinkled, his nostrils and eyes opened wide, and he shook with a mighty
sneeze. He made no effort to wipe off the snot trickling from his nose into his
wispy mustache.
       He sat there for a few minutes before recalling that he still had some sake
left from the night before. Grumbling to himself, he made his way down a long
hallway to the hearth room at the back of the house. By daylight, there were
more rooms than there had seemed to be at night, but he found his way without
difficulty. To his astonishment, the sake jar was not where he had left it.
       Instead there was a stranger by the hearth, with his head on his arm and
saliva seeping from his mouth, sound asleep. The whereabouts of the sake was
all too clear.
       The sake, of course, was not all that was missing. A quick check revealed
that not a drop of the rice gruel intended for breakfast remained. The priest
turned scarlet with rage; he could get by without the sake, but rice was a matter
of life and death. With a fierce yelp, he kicked the sleeper with all his might, but
Matahachi grunted sleepily, took his arm from underneath him, and lazily raised
his head.
       "You ... you ... !" sputtered the priest, giving him another kick.
       "What are you doing?" cried Matahachi. The veins popped out on his
sleepy face as he jumped to his feet. "You can't kick me like that!"
      "Kicking's not good enough for you! Who told you you could come in here
      and steal my rice and sake?"
      "Oh, were they yours?"
      "Of course they were!"

      "Sorry."
      "You're sorry? What good does that do me?"
      "I apologize."
      "You'll have to do more than that!"
      "What do you expect me to do?"
      "Give them back!"
      "Heh! They're already inside me; they kept me alive for a night. Can't get
      them back now!"
       "I have to live too, don't I? The most I ever get for going around and
playing music at people's gates is a few grains of rice or a couple of drops of
sake. You imbecile! Do you expect me to stand silently by and let you steal my
food? I want it back—give it back!" His tone as he made his irrational demand
was imperious, and his voice sounded to Matahachi like that of a hungry devil
straight from hell.
       "Don't be so stingy," said Matahachi disparagingly. "What's there to get so
upset about—a little rice and less than half a jar of third-rate sake."
       "You ass, maybe you turn your nose up at leftover rice, but for me it's a
day's food—a day's life!" The priest grunted and grabbed Matahachi's wrist. "I
won't let you get away with this!"
       "Don't be a fool!" countered Matahachi. Wresting his arm free and seizing
the old man by his thin hair, he tried to throw him down with a quick yank. To
his surprise, the starved-cat body didn't budge. The priest got a firm grip on
Matahachi's neck and clung to it.
       "You bastard!" barked Matahachi, reassessing his opponent's fighting
power.
       He was too late. The priest, planting his feet solidly on the floor, sent
Matahachi stumbling backward with a single push. It was a skillful move,
utilizing Matahachi's own strength, and Matahachi did not stop until he banged
against the plastered wall on the far side of the adjacent room. The posts and
lathing being rotten, a good part of the wall collapsed, showering him with dirt.
Spitting out a mouthful, he jumped up, drew his sword and lunged at the old
man.
       The latter prepared to parry the attack with his shakuhachi, but he was
already gasping for air.
       "Now see what you've got yourself into!" yelled Matahachi as he swung.
He missed but went on swinging relentlessly, giving the priest no chance to catch
his breath. The old man's face took on a ghostly look. He jumped back time and

again, but there was no spring in his step; he appeared to be on the verge of
collapse. Each time he dodged, he let out a plaintive cry, like the whimper of a
dying man. Still, his constant shifting made it impossible for Matahachi to
connect with his sword.
       Eventually Matahachi was undone by his own carelessness. When the
priest jumped into the garden, Matahachi followed blindly, but the moment his
foot hit the rotted floor of the veranda, the boards cracked and gave way. He
landed on his backside, one leg dangling through a hole.
       The priest leaped to the attack. Grabbing the front of Matahachi's kimono,
he started beating him on the head, the temples, the body—anywhere his
shakuhachi happened to fall—grunting loudly with each whack. With his leg
caught, Matahachi was helpless. His head seemed ready to swell to the size of a
barrel, but luck was with him, for at this point pieces of gold and silver began
dropping from his kimono. Each new blow was followed by the happy tinkling
of coins falling on the floor.
       "What's this?" gasped the priest, letting go of his victim. Matahachi hastily
freed his leg and jumped clear, but the old man had already vented his anger. His
aching fist and labored breathing didn't stop him from staring in wonder at the
money.
       Matahachi, hands on his throbbing head, shouted, "See, you old fool?
There was no reason to get excited over a little bit of rice and sake. I've got
money to throw away! Take it if you want it! But in return you're going to get
back the beating you gave me. Stick out your silly head, and I'll pay you with
interest for your rice and booze!"
       Instead of responding to this abuse, the priest put his face to the floor and
began weeping. Matahachi's wrath abated somewhat, but he said venomously,
"Look at you! The minute you see money, you fall apart."
       "How shameful of me!" wailed the priest. "Why am I such a fool?" Like
the strength with which he had so lately fought, his self-reproach was more
violent than that of an ordinary man. "What an ass I am!" he continued. "Haven't
I come to my senses yet? Not even at my age? Not even after being cast out of
society and sinking as low as a man can sink?"
       He turned toward the black column beside him and started beating his head
against it, all the time moaning to himself. "Why do I play this shakuhachi? Isn't
it to expel through its five openings my delusions, my stupidity, my lust, my
selfishness, my evil passions? How could I possibly have allowed myself to get
into a life-and-death struggle over a bit of food and drink? And with a man

young enough to be my son?"
        Matahachi had never seen anyone like this. The old man would weep for a
moment, then ram his head against the column again. He seemed intent on
beating his forehead until it split in two. More numerous by far were his
inflictions on himself than the blows he had dealt Matahachi. Presently, blood
began to flow from his brow.
        Matahachi felt obliged to prevent him from torturing himself further.
"Look now," he said. "Stop that. You don't know what you're doing!"
       "Leave me alone," pleaded the priest.
       "But what's wrong with you?"
       "Nothing's wrong."
       "There must be something. Are you sick?"
       "No."
       "Then what is it?"
        "I'm disgusted with myself. I'd like to beat this evil body of mine to death
and feed it to the crows, but I don't want to die a stupid fool. I'd like to be as
strong and upright as the next person before I discard this flesh. Losing my self-
control makes me furious. I guess you could call it sickness after all."
        Feeling sorry for him, Matahachi picked up the fallen money and tried to
press some of it into his hand. "It was partly my fault," he said apologetically.
"I'll give you this, and then maybe you'll forgive me."
        "I don't want it!" cried the priest, quickly withdrawing his hand. "I don't
need money. I tell you, I don't need it!" Though he had previously exploded in
anger over a bit of rice gruel, he now looked at the money with loathing.
Shaking his head vigorously, he backed away, still on his knees.
       "You're an odd one," said Matahachi.
       "Not really."
       "Well, you certainly act strange."
       "Don't let it worry you."
       "You sound like you come from the western provinces. Your accent, I mean.
       "I guess I would. I was born in Himeji."
       "Is that so? I'm from that area too—Mimasaka."
       "Mimasaka?" repeated the priest, fixing his eye on Matahachi. "Just where
       in Mimasaka?"
       "The village of Yoshino. Miyamoto, to be exact."
        The old man seemed to relax. Sitting down on the porch, he spoke quietly.
"Miyamoto? That's a name that brings back memories. I was once on guard duty

at the stockade in Hinagura. I know that area fairly well."
       "Does that mean you used to be a samurai in the Himeji fief?"
       "Yes. I suppose I don't look it now, but I used to be something of a warrior.
My name is Aoki Tan—"
       He broke off, then just as abruptly went on: "That's not true. I just made it
up. Forget I said anything at all." He stood up, saying, "I'm going into town, play
my shakuhachi and get some rice." With that, he turned and walked rapidly
toward the field of miscanthus.


       After he was gone, Matahachi started wondering whether it had been right
of him to offer the old priest money from the dead samurai's pouch. Soon he'd
solved his dilemma by telling himself there couldn't be any harm in just
borrowing some, provided it wasn't a lot. "If I deliver these things to the dead
man's home, the way he wanted me to," he thought, "I'll have to have money for
expenses, and what choice do I have but to take it out of the cash I have here?"
This easy rationalization was so comforting that from that day on he began using
the money little by little.
       There remained the question of the certificate made out to Sasaki Kojirō.
The man appeared to have been a rōnin, but mightn't he instead have been in the
service of some daimyō? Matahachi had found no clue to where the man was
from, hence had no idea where to take the certificate. His only hope, he decided,
would be to locate the master swordsman Kanemaki Jisai, who no doubt knew
all there was to know about Sasaki.
       As Matahachi made his way from Fushimi toward Osaka, he asked at
every teahouse, eating house and inn whether anyone knew of Jisai. All the
replies were negative; even the added information that Jisai was an accredited
disciple of Toda Seigen elicited no response.
       Finally, a samurai with whom Matahachi struck up an acquaintance on the
road displayed a glimmer of recognition. "I've heard of Jisai, but if he's still
alive, he must be very old. Somebody said he went east and became a recluse in
a village in Kōzuke, or somewhere. If you want to find out more about him, you
should go to Osaka Castle and talk to a man named Tomita Mondonoshō."
Mondonoshō, it seemed, was one of Hideyori's teachers in the martial arts, and
Matahachi's informant was fairly sure he belonged to the same family as Seigen.
       Though disappointed at the vagueness of his first real lead, Matahachi
resolved to follow it up. Upon his arrival in Osaka, he took a room at a cheap inn

on one of the busier streets and as soon as he was settled in asked the innkeeper
whether he knew of a man named Tomita Mondonoshō at Osaka Castle.
        "Yes, I've heard the name," replied the innkeeper. "I believe he's the
grandson of Toda Seigen. He's not Lord Hideyori's personal instructor, but he
does teach swordsmanship to some of the samurai in the castle. Or at least he
used to. I think he might have gone back to Echizen some years ago. Yes, that's
what he did.
        "You could go to Echizen and look for him, but there's no guarantee he's
still there. Instead of taking such a long trip on a hunch, wouldn't it be easier to
look up Itō Ittōsai? I'm pretty sure he studied the Chūjō Style under Jisai before
developing his own style."
        The innkeeper's suggestion seemed sensible, but when Matahachi began
looking for Ittōsai, he found himself in another blind alley. As far as he could
learn, the man had until recently been living in a small hut in Shirakawa, just
east of Kyoto, but he was no longer there and hadn't been seen in Kyoto or
Osaka for some time.
        Before long, Matahachi's resolution flagged and he was ready to drop the
whole business. The bustle and excitement of the city rekindled his ambition and
stirred his youthful soul. In a wide-open town like this, why should he spend his
time looking for a dead man's family? There were plenty of things to do here;
people were looking for young men like him. At Fushimi Castle, the authorities
had been single-mindedly implementing the policies of the Tokugawa
government. Here, however, the generals running Osaka Castle were searching
out rōnin to build up an army. Not publicly, of course, but openly enough so that
it was common knowledge. It was a fact that rōnin were more welcome and
could live better here than in any other castle town in the country.
        Heady rumors circulated among the townspeople. It was said, for instance,
that Hideyori was quietly providing funds for such fugitive daimyō as Gotō
Matabei, Sanada Yukimura, Akashi Kamon and even the dangerous Chōsokabe
Morichika, who now lived in a rented house in a narrow street on the outskirts of
town.
        Chōsokabe had, despite his youth, shaved his head like a Buddhist priest
and changed his name to Ichimusai—"The Man of a Single Dream." It was a
declaration that the affairs of this floating world no longer concerned him, and
ostensibly he passed his time in elegant frivolities. It was widely known,
however, that he had in his service seven or eight hundred rōnin, all of them firm
in their confidence that when the proper time came, he would rise up and

vindicate his late benefactor Hideyoshi. It was rumored that his living expenses,
including the pay for his rōnin, all came from Hideyori's private purse.
       For two months Matahachi wandered about Osaka, increasingly confident
that this was the place for him. Here was where he would catch the straw that
would lead to success. For the first time in years he felt as brave and dauntless as
when he'd gone off to war. He was healthy and alive again, unperturbed by the
gradual depletion of the dead samurai's money, for he believed luck was finally
turning his way. Every day was a joy, a delight. He was sure he was about to
stumble over a rock and come up covered with money. Good fortune was on the
verge of finding him.
       New clothes! That was what he needed. And so he bought himself a
complete new outfit, carefully choosing material that would be suitable in the
cold of approaching winter. Then, having decided living in an inn was too
expensive, he rented a small room belonging to a saddle-maker in the vicinity of
the Junkei Moat and began taking his meals out. He went to see what he wanted
to see, came home when he felt like it, and stayed out all night from time to time,
as the spirit moved him. While basking in this happy-go-lucky existence, he
remained on the lookout for a friend, a connection who would lead him to a good
paying position in the service of a great daimyō.
       It required a certain amount of self-restraint for Matahachi to live within
his means, but he felt he was behaving himself better than ever before. He was
repeatedly buoyed up by stories of how this or that samurai had not long ago
been hauling dirt away from a construction site but was now to be seen riding
pompously through town with twenty retainers and a spare horse.
       At other times he felt a trace of dejection. "The world's a stone wall," he
would think. "And they've put the rocks so close together there's not a chink
where anybody can get in." But his frustration always eddied away. "What am I
talking about? It just looks that way when you still haven't seen your chance. It's
always difficult to break in, but once I find an opening . . ."
       When he asked the saddle-maker whether he knew of a position, the latter
replied optimistically, "You're young and strong. If you apply at the castle,
they're sure to find a place for you."
       But finding the right work was not as easy as that. The last month of the
year found Matahachi still unemployed, his money diminished by half.


      Under the wintry sun of the busiest month of the year, the hordes of people

milling about the streets looked surprisingly unrushed. In the center of town
there were empty lots, where in early morning the grass was white with frost. As
the day progressed, the streets became muddy, and the feeling of winter was
driven away by the sound of merchants hawking their goods with clanging gongs
and booming drums. Seven or eight stalls, surrounded by shabby straw matting
to keep outsiders from looking in, beckoned with paper flags and lances
decorated with feathers to advertise shows being presented inside. Barkers
competed stridently to lure idle passersby into their flimsy theaters.
       The smell of cheap soy sauce permeated the air. In the shops, hairy-legged
men, skewers of food stuffed in their mouths, whinnied like horses, and at
twilight long-sleeved women with whitened faces simpered like ewes, walking
together in flocks and munching on parched-bean tidbits.
       One evening a fight broke out among the customers of a man who had set
up a sake shop by placing some stools on the side of the street. Before anyone
could tell who had won, the combatants turned tail and ran off down the street,
leaving a trail of dripping blood behind them.
       "Thank you, sir," said the sake vendor to Matahachi, whose glaring
presence had caused the fighting townsmen to flee. "If you hadn't been here, they
would have broken all my dishes." The man bowed several times, then served
Matahachi another jar of sake, which he said he trusted was warmed to just the
right temperature. He also presented some snacks as a token of his appreciation.
       Matahachi was pleased with himself. The brawl had erupted between two
workmen, and when he had scowled at them, threatening to kill them both if they
did any damage to the stall, they had fled.
     "Lots of people around, aren't there?" he remarked amiably.
     "It's the end of the year. They stay awhile and move on, but others keep
     coming."
     "Nice that the weather's holding up."
       Matahachi's face was red from drink. As he lifted his cup, he remembered
having sworn off before he went to work at Fushimi, and vaguely wondered how
he had started again. "Well, what of it?" he thought. "If a man can't have a drink
now and then ..."
       "Bring me another, old boy," he said aloud.
       The man sitting quietly on the stool next to Matahachi's was also a rōnin.
His long and short swords were impressive; townsmen would be inclined to steer
clear of him, even though he wore no cloak over his kimono, which was quite
dirty around the neck.

       "Hey, bring me another one too, and make it quick!" he shouted. Propping
his right leg on his left knee, he scrutinized Matahachi from the feet up. When
his eyes came to the face, he smiled and said, "Hello."
       "Hello," said Matahachi. "Have a sip of mine while yours is being heated."
       "Thanks," said the man, holding out his cup. "It's humiliating to be a
drinker, isn't it? I saw you sitting here with your sake, and then this nice aroma
floated through the air and pulled me over here—by the sleeve, sort of." He
drained his cup in one gulp.
       Matahachi liked his style. He seemed friendly, and there was something
dashing about him. He could drink too; he put down five jars in the next few
minutes, while Matahachi was taking his time over one. Yet he was still sober.
       "How much do you usually drink?" asked Matahachi.
       "Oh, I don't know," replied the man offhandedly. "Ten or twelve jars, when
I feel like it."
       They fell to talking about the political situation, and after a time the rōnin
straightened up his shoulders and said, "Who's Ieyasu anyway? What kind of
nonsense is it for him to ignore Hideyori's claims and go around calling himself
the 'Great Overlord'? Without Honda Masazumi and some of his other old
supporters, what have you got? Cold-bloodedness, foxiness and a little political
ability—I mean, all he has is a certain flair for politics that you usually don't find
in military men.
       "Personally, I wish Ishida Mitsunari had won at Sekigahara, but he was too
high-minded to organize the daimyō. And his status wasn't high enough."
Having delivered himself of this appraisal, he suddenly asked, "If Osaka were to
clash with Edo again, which side would you be on?"
       Not without hesitation, Matahachi replied, "Osaka."
       "Good!" The man stood up with his sake jar in his hand. "You're one of us.
Let's drink to that! What fief do you— Oh, I guess I shouldn't ask that until I tell
you who I am. My name is Akakabe Yasoma. I'm from Gamō. Perhaps you've
heard of Ban Dan'emon? I'm a good friend of his. We'll be together again one of
these days. I'm also a friend of Susukida Hayato Kanesuke, the distinguished
general at Osaka Castle. We traveled together when he was still a rōnin. I've also
met Ono Shurinosuke three or four times, but he's too gloomy for me, even if he
does have more political influence than Kanesuke."
       He stepped back, paused for a moment, seemingly having second thoughts
about talking too much, then asked, "Who are you?"
      Matahachi, though he did not believe everything the man had said, felt

      somehow that he had been put temporarily in the shade.
      "Do you know of Toda Seigen?" he asked. "The man who originated the
      Tomita Style."
      "I've heard the name."
       "Well, my teacher was the great and selfless hermit Kanemaki Jisai, who
received the true Tomita Style from Seigen and then developed the Chūjō Style."
       "Then you must be a real swordsman."
       "That's right," replied Matahachi. He was beginning to enjoy the game.
       "You know," said Yasoma, "I've been thinking that's what you must be.
Your body looks disciplined, and there's an air of capability about you. What
were you called when you were training under Jisai? I mean, if I'm not being too
bold in asking."
       "My name is Sasaki Kojirō," said Matahachi with a straight face. "Itō
Yagorō, the creator of the Ittō Style, is a senior disciple from the same school."
"Is that a fact?" said Yasoma with astonishment.
       For a jittery moment, Matahachi thought of retracting everything, but it
was too late. Yasoma had already knelt on the ground and was making a deep
bow. There was no turning back.
       "Forgive me," he said several times. "I've often heard Sasaki Kojirō was a
splendid swordsman, and I must apologize for not having spoken more politely. I
had no way of knowing who you were."
       Matahachi was vastly relieved. If Yasoma had happened to be a friend or
acquaintance of Kojirō, he would have had to fight for his life.
       "You needn't bow like that," said Matahachi magnanimously. "If you insist
on standing on formalities, we won't be able to talk as friends."
       "But you must have been annoyed by my spouting off so."
       "Why? I have no particular status or position. I'm only a young man who
doesn't know much about the ways of the world."
       "Yes, but you're a great swordsman. I've heard your name many times.
Now that I think about it, I can see you must be Sasaki Kojirō." He stared
intently at Matahachi. "What's more, I don't think it's right that you should have
no official position."
       Matahachi replied innocently, "Well, I've devoted myself so single-
mindedly to my sword that I haven't had time to make many friends."
       "I see. Does that mean you aren't interested in finding a good position?"
"No; I've always thought that one day I'd have to find a lord to serve. I just
haven't reached that point yet."

       "Well, it should be simple enough. You have your reputation with the
sword to back you up, and that makes all the difference in the world. Of course,
if you remain silent, then no matter how much talent you have, nobody's likely to
search you out. Look at me. I didn't even know who you were until you told me.
I was completely taken by surprise."
       Yasoma paused, then said, "If you'd like me to help you, I'd be glad to. To
tell the truth, I've asked my friend Susukida Kanesuke to see whether he can find
a position for me too. I'd like to be taken on at Osaka Castle, even though there
might not be much pay in it. I'm sure Kanesuke would be happy to recommend a
person like you to the powers that be. If you'd like, I'll be glad to speak to him."
       As Yasoma waxed enthusiastic about the prospects, Matahachi could not
avoid the feeling that he had stumbled straight into something it wouldn't be easy
to get out of. Eager as he was to find work, he feared he'd made a mistake
passing himself off as Sasaki Kojirō. On the other hand, if he had said he was
Hon'iden Matahachi, a country samurai from Mimasaka, Yasoma would never
have offered his help. Indeed, he probably would have looked down his nose at
him. There was no getting around it: the name Sasaki Kojirō had certainly made
a strong impression.
       But then—was there actually anything to worry about? The real Kojirō
was dead, and Matahachi was the only person who knew that, for he had the
certificate, the dead man's only identification. Without it, there was no way for
the authorities to know who the rōnin was; it was extremely unlikely they would
have gone to the trouble of conducting an investigation. After all, who was the
man but a "spy" who had been stoned to death. Gradually, as Matahachi
convinced himself that his secret would never be discovered, a bold scheme took
definite shape in his mind: he would become Sasaki Kojirō. As of this moment.
       "Bring the bill," he called, taking some coins from his money pouch.
       As Matahachi rose to leave, Yasoma, thrown into confusion, blurted,
"What about my proposal?"
       "Oh," replied Matahachi, "I'd be very grateful if you'd speak to your friend
on my behalf, but we can't discuss this sort of thing here. Let's go somewhere
quiet where we can have some privacy."
       "Why, of course," said Yasoma, obviously relieved. He appeared to think it
only natural that Matahachi paid his bill too.
       Soon they were in a district some distance from the main streets.
Matahachi had intended to take his newfound friend to an elegant drinking
establishment, but Yasoma pointed out that going to such a place would be a

waste of money. He suggested someplace cheaper and more interesting, and
while singing the praises of the red-light district, led Matahachi to what was
euphemistically called the Town of Priestesses. Here, it was said, with only
slight exaggeration, there were a thousand houses of pleasure, and a trade so
thriving that a hundred barrels of lamp oil were consumed in a single night.
Matahachi was a little reluctant at first but soon found himself attracted by the
gaiety of the atmosphere.
       Nearby was an offshoot of the castle moat, into which tidewater flowed
from the bay. If one looked very closely, one could discern fish lice and river
crabs crawling about under the projecting windows and red lanterns. Matahachi
did look closely and ended up slightly unsettled, for they reminded him of
deadly scorpions.
       The district was peopled to a large extent by women with thickly
powdered faces. Among them a pretty face was to be seen now and then, but
there were many others who seemed to be more than forty, women stalking the
streets with sad eyes, heads wrapped in cloth to fend off the cold, teeth
blackened, but trying wanly to stir the hearts of the men who gathered here.
       "There sure are lots of them," said Matahachi with a sigh.
       "I told you so," replied Yasoma, who was at pains to make excuses for the
women. "And they're better than the next teahouse waitress or singing girl you
might take up with. People tend to be put off by the idea of selling sex, but if you
spend a winter's night with one of them and talk with her about her family and so
on, you're likely to find she's just like any other woman. And not really to blame
for having become a whore.
       "Some were once concubines of the shōgun, and there are lots whose
fathers were once retainers of some daimyō who have since lost power. It was
the same centuries ago when the Taira fell to the Minamoto. You'll find, my
friend, that in the gutters of this floating world, much of the trash consists of
fallen flowers."
       They went into a house, and Matahachi left everything to Yasoma, who
seemed to be quite experienced. He knew how to order the sake, how to deal
with the girls; he was flawless. Matahachi found the experience quite
entertaining.
       They spent the night, and even at noon on the next day, Yasoma showed no
sign of tiring. Matahachi felt recompensed to some extent for all those times he
had been pushed off into a back room at the Yomogi, but he was beginning to
run down.

      Finally, admitting he'd had enough, he said, "I don't want any more to drink.
      Let's go."
      Yasoma did not budge. "Stay with me until evening," he said.
      "What happens then?"
       "I have an appointment to see Susukida Kanesuke. It's too early to go to
his house now, and anyway I won't be able to discuss your situation until I have
a better idea of what you want."
       "I guess I shouldn't ask for too large an allowance at first."
       "There's no point in selling yourself cheap. A samurai of your caliber
should be able to command any figure he names. If you say you'll settle for any
old position, you'll be demeaning yourself. Why don't I tell him you want an
allowance of twenty-five hundred bushels? A samurai with self-confidence is
always better paid and treated. You shouldn't give the impression you'd be
satisfied with just anything."
       As evening approached, the streets in this area, lying as they did in the
immense shadow of Osaka Castle, darkened early. Having left the brothel,
Matahachi and Yasoma made their way through the town to one of the more
exclusive samurai residential areas. They stood with their backs to the moat, the
cold wind driving away the effects of the sake they'd been pouring into
themselves all day.
      "That's Susukida's house there," said Yasoma.
      "The one with the bracketed roof over the gate?"
      "No, the corner house next to it."
      "Hmm. Big, isn't it?"
      "Kanesuke's made a name for himself. Until he was thirty or so, nobody had
      ever heard of him, but now ..."
       Matahachi pretended to pay no attention to what Yasoma was saying. Not
that he did not believe it; on the contrary, he had come to trust Yasoma so
thoroughly that he no longer questioned what the man said. He felt, however,
that he should remain nonchalant. As he gazed at the mansions of the daimyō,
which ringed the great castle, his still youthful ambition told him, "I'll live in a
place like that too—one of these days."
       "Now," said Yasoma, "I'll see Kanesuke and talk him into hiring you. But
before that, what about the money?"
       "Oh, sure," said Matahachi, aware that a bribe was in order. Taking the
money pouch from his breast, he realized that it had shrunk to about a third of its
original bulk. Pouring it all out in his hand, he said, "This is all I have. Is it

enough?"
      "Oh, sure, quite enough."
      "You'll want to wrap it up in something, won't you?"
      "No, no. Kanesuke's not the only man around here who takes a fee for
finding somebody a position. They all do it, and very openly. There's nothing to
be embarrassed about."
      Matahachi kept back a little of the cash, but after handing over the rest
began to feel uneasy. When Yasoma walked away, he followed for a few steps.
"Do the best you can," he implored.
      "Don't worry. If it looks as though he's going to be difficult, all I have to
do is keep the money and return it to you. He's not the only influential man in
Osaka. I could just as easily ask help from Ono or Gotō. I've got lots of
contacts."
      "When will I get an answer?"
      "Let's see. You could wait for me, but you wouldn't want to stand here in
this wind, would you? Anyway, people might suspect you were up to no good.
Let's meet again tomorrow."
     "Where?"
     "Come to that vacant lot where they're holding sideshows."
     "All right."
     "The surest way would be for you to wait at that sake vendor's where we
     first met."
      After they settled on the time, Yasoma waved his hand and walked grandly
through the gate to the mansion, swinging his shoulders and showing not the
slightest hesitation. Matahachi, duly impressed, felt Yasoma must indeed have
known Kanesuke since his less prosperous days. Confidence swept over him,
and that night he dreamed pleasant dreams of his future.
      At the appointed time, Matahachi was walking through the melting frost
on the open lot. As on the previous day, the wind was cold, and there were a lot
of people about. He waited until sundown but saw no sign of Akakabe Yasoma.
      The day after that, Matahachi went again. "Something must have detained
him," he thought charitably, as he sat staring at the faces of the passing crowd.
"He'll show up today." But again the sun set without Yasoma's appearing.
      On the third day, Matahachi said to the sake vendor, somewhat timidly,
"I'm here again."
      "Are you waiting for someone?"
      "Yes, I'm supposed to meet a man named Akakabe Yasoma. I met him here

the other day." Matahachi went on to explain the situation in detail.
       "That scoundrel?" gasped the sake vendor. "Do you mean he told you he'd
find you a good position and then stole your money?"
       "He didn't steal it. I gave him some money to give to a man named
Susukida Kanesuke. I'm waiting here to find out what happened."
       "You poor man! You can wait a hundred years, but I daresay you won't see
him again."
       "Wh-what? Why do you say that?"
       "Why, he's a notorious crook! This area's full of parasites like him. If they
see anybody who looks a little innocent, they pounce on him. I thought of
warning you, but I didn't want to interfere. I thought you'd know from the way
he looked and acted what sort of character he was. Now you've gone and lost
your money. Too bad!"
       The man was all sympathy. He tried to assure Matahachi that it was no
disgrace to be taken in by the thieves operating here. But it wasn't
embarrassment that troubled Matahachi; it was finding his money gone, and with
it his high hopes, that made his blood boil. He stared helplessly at the crowd
moving about them.
       "I doubt it'll do any good," said the sake vendor, "but you might try asking
over there at the magician's stall. The local vermin often gather behind there to
gamble. If Yasoma came by some money, he may be trying to build it into
something bigger."
       "Thanks," said Matahachi, jumping up excitedly. "Which is the magician's
stall?"
       The enclosure to which the man pointed was surrounded by a fence of
pointed bamboo stakes. Out in front, barkers were drumming up trade, and flags
suspended near the wooden gate announced the names of several famous sleight-
of-hand artists. From within the curtains and strips of straw matting lining the
fence came the sound of strange music, mingled with the loud, rapid patter of the
performers and the applause of the audience.
       Going around to the rear, Matahachi found another gate. When he glanced
in, a lookout asked, "You here to gamble?"
       He nodded and the man let him in. He found himself in a space surrounded
by tenting but open to the sky. About twenty men, all unsavory types, sat in a
circle playing a game. All eyes turned toward Matahachi and one man silently
made room for him to sit down.
      "Is Akakabe Yasoma here?" Matahachi asked.

     "Yasoma?" repeated one gambler in a puzzled tone. "Come to think of it, he
     hasn't been around lately. Why?"
     "Do you think he'll come later?"
     "How should I know? Sit down and play."
     "I didn't come to play."
     "What're you doing here if you don't want to play?"
     "I'm looking for Yasoma. Sorry to bother you."
     "Well, why don't you go look somewhere else!"
     "I said I'm sorry," said Matahachi, exiting hastily.
      "Hold on there!" commanded one of the gamblers, getting up and
following him. "You can't get away with just saying you're sorry. Even if you
don't play, you'll pay for your seat!"
      "I don't have any money."
      "No money! I see. Just waiting for a chance to swipe some cash, huh?
Damned thief, that's what you are."
      "I'm no thief! You can't call me that!" Matahachi pushed the hilt of his
sword forward, but this merely amused the gambler.
      "Idiot!" he barked. "If threats from the likes of you scared me, I wouldn't
be able to stay alive in Osaka for one day. Use your sword, if you dare!"
     "I warn you, I mean it!"
     "Oh, you do, do you?"
     "Do you know who I am?"
     "Why should I?"
      "I'm Sasaki Kojirō, successor of Toda Seigen of Jōkyōji Village in
Echizen. He created the Tomita Style," Matahachi declared proudly, thinking this
pronouncement alone would put the man to flight. It didn't. The gambler spat
and turned back into the enclosure.
      "Hey, come on, all of you! This guy's just called himself some fancy name;
seems to want to pull his sword on us. Let's have a look at his swordsmanship. It
ought to be fun."
      Matahachi, seeing that the man was off guard, suddenly drew his sword
and sliced across his backside.
      The man jumped straight up in the air. "You son of a bitch!" he screamed.
      Matahachi dived into the crowd. By sneaking from one cluster of people to
the next, he managed to stay hidden, but every face he saw looked like one of the
gamblers. Deciding he couldn't hide that way forever, he looked around for more
substantial shelter.

       Directly in front of him, draped on a bamboo fence, was a curtain with a
large tiger painted on it. There was also a banner on the gate bearing a design of
a forked spear and a snake-eye crest, and a barker standing on an empty box,
shouting hoarsely, "See the tiger! Come in and see the tiger! Take a trip of a
thousand miles! This enormous tiger, my friends, was captured personally by the
great general Katō Kiyomasa in Korea. Don't miss the tiger!" His spiel was
frenetic and rhythmical.
       Matahachi threw down a coin and darted through the entrance. Feeling
relatively safe, he looked around for the beast. At the far end of the tent a large
tiger skin lay stretched out like laundry drying on a wooden panel. The
spectators were staring at it with great curiosity, seemingly unperturbed by the
fact that the creature was neither whole nor alive.
       "So that's what a tiger looks like," said one man.
       "Big, isn't it?" marveled another.
       Matahachi stood a little to one side of the tiger skin, until suddenly he
spotted an old man and woman, and his ears perked up in disbelief as he listened
to their voices.
       "Uncle Gon," said the woman, "that tiger there is dead, isn't it?"
       The old samurai, stretching his hand over the bamboo railing and feeling
the skin, replied gravely, "Of course it's dead. This is only the hide." "But that
man outside was talking as though it was alive."
       "Well, maybe that's what they mean by a fast talker," he said with a little
laugh.
       Osugi didn't take it so lightly. Pursing her lips, she protested, "Don't be
silly! If it's not real, the sign outside should say so. If all I was going to see was a
tiger's skin, I'd just as soon see a picture. Let's go and get our money back."
       "Don't make a fuss, Granny. People will laugh at you."
       "That's all right. I'm not too proud. If you don't want to go, I'll go myself."
As she started pushing her way back through the spectators, Matahachi ducked,
but too late. Uncle Gon had already seen him.
      "Hey, there, Matahachi! Is that you?" he shouted.
      Osugi, whose eyes were none too good, stammered, "Wh-what's that you
      said, Uncle Gon?"
      "Didn't you see? Matahachi was standing there, just behind you."
      "Impossible!"
      "He was there, but he ran away."
      "Where? Which way?"

        The two scampered out the wooden gate into the crowd, already veiled in
the hues of evening. Matahachi kept bumping into people but disentangled
himself and ran on.
      "Wait, son, wait!" cried Osugi.
      Matahachi glanced behind him and saw his mother chasing him like a
      madwoman. Uncle Gon, too, was waving his hands frantically.
      "Matahachi!" he cried. "Why are you running away? What's wrong with
      you? Matahachi! Matahachi!"
        Seeing she was not going to be able to catch him, Osugi stuck her wrinkled
neck forward and, at the top of her lungs, screamed, "Stop, thief! Robber! Catch
him!"
      Immediately a throng of bystanders took up the chase, and those in the
      forefront soon fell upon Matahachi with bamboo poles.
      "Keep him there!"
      "The scoundrel!"
      "Give him a good beating!"
        The mob had Matahachi cornered, and some even spat on him. Arriving
with Uncle Gon, Osugi quickly took in the scene and turned furiously on
Matahachi's attackers. Pushing them away, she seized the hilt of her short sword
and bared her teeth.
      "What are you doing?" she cried. "Why are you attacking this man?" "He's
      a thief!"
      "He is not! He's my son."
      "Your son?"
        "Yes, he's my son, the son of a samurai, and you have no business beating
him. You're nothing but common townspeople. If you touch him again I'll ... I'll
take you all on!"
        "Are you joking? Who shouted 'thief' a minute ago?"
        "That was me, all right, I don't deny it. I'm a devoted mother, and I thought
if I cried 'thief,' my son would stop running. But who asked you stupid oafs to hit
him? It's outrageous!"
        Startled by her volte-face, yet admiring her mettle, the crowd slowly
dispersed. Osugi seized her wayward son by the collar and dragged him to the
grounds of a nearby shrine.
        After standing and looking on from the shrine gate for a few minutes,
Uncle Gon came forward and said, "Granny, you don't have to treat Matahachi
like that. He's not a child." He tried to pull her hand away from Matahachi's

collar, but the old woman elbowed him roughly out of the way.
        "You stay out of this! He's my son, and I'll punish him as I see fit, with no
help from you. Just keep quiet and mind your own business! ... Matahachi, you
ungrateful ... I'll show you!"
        It is said that the older people grow, the simpler and more direct they
become, and watching Osugi, one could not help but agree. At a time when other
mothers might have been weeping for joy, Osugi was seething with rage.
        She forced Matahachi to the ground and beat his head against it.
        "The very idea! Running away from your own mother! You weren't born
from the fork of a tree, you lout—you're my son!" She began spanking him as
though he were still a child. "I didn't think you could possibly be alive, and here
you are loafing around Osaka! It's shameful! You brazen, good-for-nothing ...
Why didn't you come home and pay the proper respects to your ancestors? Why
didn't you so much as show your face just once to your old mother? Didn't you
know all your relatives were worried sick about you?"
        "Please, Mama," begged Matahachi, crying like a baby. "Forgive me.
Please forgive me! I'm sorry. I know what I did was wrong. It was because I
knew I'd failed you that I couldn't go home. I didn't really mean to run away
from you. I was so surprised to see you, I started running without thinking. I was
so ashamed of the way I'd been living, I couldn't face you and Uncle Gon." He
covered his face with his hands.
        Osugi's nose crinkled, and she, too, started to bawl, but almost
immediately she stopped herself. Too proud to show weakness, she renewed her
attack, saying sarcastically, "If you're so ashamed of yourself and feel you've
disgraced your ancestors, then you really must have been up to no good all this
time."
        Uncle Gon, unable to restrain himself, pleaded, "That's enough. If you
keep on like that, it'll surely twist his nature."
        "I told you to keep your advice to yourself. You're a man; you shouldn't be
so soft. As his mother, I have to be just as stern as his father would be if he were
still alive. I'll do the punishing, and I'm not finished yet! ... Matahachi! Sit up
straight! Look me in the face."
        She sat down formally on the ground and pointed to the place where he
was to sit.
        "Yes, Mama," he said obediently, lifting his dirt-stained shoulders and
getting into a kneeling position. He was afraid of his mother. She could on
occasion be an indulgent parent, but her readiness to raise the subject of his duty

to his ancestors made him uncomfortable.
       "I absolutely forbid you to hide anything from me," said Osugi. "Now,
what exactly have you been doing since you ran off to Sekigahara? Start
explaining, and don't stop till I've heard all I want to hear."
       "Don't worry, I won't hold anything back," he began, having lost the desire
to fight. True to his word, he blurted out the whole story in detail: about escaping
from Sekigahara, hiding at Ibuki, becoming involved with Okō, living off her—
though hating it—for several years. And how he now sincerely regretted what
he'd done. It was a relief, like throwing up bile from his stomach, and he felt
much better after he'd confessed.
       "Hmm . . ." mumbled Uncle Gon from time to time.
       Osugi clicked her tongue, saying, "I'm shocked at your conduct. And what
are you doing now? You seem to be able to dress well. Have you found a
position that pays adequately?"
       "Yes," said Matahachi. The answer slipped out without forethought, and he
hastened to correct himself. "I mean, no, I don't have a position."
       "Then where do you get money to live on?"
       "My sword—I teach swordsmanship." There was the ring of truth in the
way he said this, and it had the desired effect.
       "Is that so?" said Osugi with obvious interest. For the first time, a glimmer
of good humor appeared in her face. "Swordsmanship, is it? Well, it doesn't
really surprise me that a son of mine would find time to polish his
swordsmanship—even leading the kind of life you were. Hear that, Uncle Gon?
He is my son, after all."
       Uncle Gon nodded enthusiastically, grateful to see the old woman's spirits
rise. "We might have known," he said. "That shows he does have the blood of his
Hon'iden ancestors in his veins. So what if he went astray for a time? It's clear
he's got the right spirit!"
      "Matahachi," said Osugi.
      "Yes, Mama."
      "Here in this area, who did you study swordsmanship under?"
      "Kanemaki Jisai."
       "Oh? Why, he's famous." Osugi had a happy expression on her face.
Matahachi, eager to please her even more, brought out the certificate and
unrolled it, taking care to cover Sasaki's name with his thumb.
      "Look at this," he said.
      "Let me see," said Osugi. She reached for the scroll, but Matahachi kept a

      firm grip on it.
      "See, Mama, you don't have to worry about me."
       She nodded. "Yes, indeed, this is fine. Uncle Gon, look at this. Isn't it
splendid? I always thought, even when Matahachi was a baby, that he was
smarter and more capable than Takezō and the other boys." She was so
overjoyed she began spitting as she spoke.
      At just this moment, Matahachi's hand slipped, and the name on the scroll
      became visible.
      "Wait a minute," said Osugi. "Why does it say 'Sasaki Kojirō'?"
      "Oh, that? Why, uh, that's my nom de guerre."
      "Nom de guerre? Why do you need that? Isn't Hon'iden Matahachi good
      enough for you?"
       "Yes, fine!" replied Matahachi, thinking fast. "But when I thought it over, I
decided not to use my own name. With my shameful past, I was afraid of
disgracing our ancestors."
       "I see. That was good thinking, I suppose. Well, I don't imagine you know
anything about what's gone on in the village, so I'll tell you. Now pay attention;
it's important."
       Osugi launched into a spirited account of the incident that had occurred in
Miyamoto, choosing her words in a way calculated to spur Matahachi to action.
She explained how the Hon'iden family had been insulted, how she and Uncle
Gon had been searching for years for Otsū and Takezō. Although she tried not to
get emotional, she did get carried away with her story; her eyes moistened and
her voice thickened.
       Matahachi, listening with bowed head, was struck by the vividness of her
narrative. At times like this, he found it easy to be a good and obedient son, but
whereas his mother's main concern was family honor and the samurai spirit, he
was most deeply moved by something else: if what she was saying was true,
Otsū didn't love him anymore. This was the first time he had actually heard this.
"Is that really true?" he asked.
       Osugi, seeing his face change color, drew the mistaken conclusion that her
lecture on honor and spirit was taking effect. "If you think I'm lying," she said,
"ask Uncle Gon. That trollop abandoned you and ran off with Takezō. To put it
another way, you could say Takezō, knowing you wouldn't be back for some
time, lured Otsū into going away with him. Isn't that right, Uncle Gon?"
       "Yes. When Takezō was tied up in the tree, he got Otsū to help him escape,
and the two made off together. Everybody said there must have been something

going on between them."
       This brought out the worst in Matahachi and inspired a new revulsion
against his boyhood friend.
       Sensing this, his mother fanned the spark. "Do you see now, Matahachi!
Do you understand why Uncle Gon and I left the village? We're going to have
our revenge on those two. Unless I kill them, I can't ever show my face in the
village again or stand before the memorial tablets of our ancestors."
      "I understand."
      "And do you see that unless we avenge ourselves, you can't return to
      Miyamoto either?"
      "I won't go back. I'll never go back."
      "That's not the point. You've got to kill those two. They're our mortal
      enemies."
      "Yeah, I guess so."
      "You don't sound very enthusiastic. What's the matter? Don't you think
      you're strong enough to kill Takezō?"
      "Of course I am," he protested.
      Uncle Gon spoke up. "Don't worry, Matahachi. I'll stick by you."
       "And your old mother will too," added Osugi. "Let's take their heads back
to the village as souvenirs for the people. Isn't that a good idea, son? If we do,
then you can go ahead and find yourself a wife and settle down. You'll vindicate
yourself as a samurai and earn a fine reputation as well. There's no better name
in the whole Yoshino area than Hon'iden, and you will have proved that to
everyone beyond a doubt. Can you do it, Matahachi? Will you do it?"
       "Yes, Mama."
       "That's a good son. Uncle Gon, don't just stand there, congratulate the boy.
He's sworn to take revenge on Takezō and Otsū." Seemingly satisfied at last, she
started to rise from the ground with visible difficulty. "Oh, that hurts!" she cried.
      "What's the matter?" asked Uncle Gon.
      "The ground is freezing. My stomach and hips ache."
      "That's not so good. Are you coming down with piles again?"
      Matahachi, in a show of filial devotion, said, "Climb on my back, Mama."
       "Oh, you want to carry me? Isn't that nice!" Grasping his shoulders, she
shed tears of joy. "How many years has it been? Look, Uncle Gon, Matahachi's
going to carry me on his back."
       As her tears fell on his neck, Matahachi himself felt strangely pleased.
"Uncle Gon, where are you staying?" he asked.

     "We still have to find an inn, but any will do. Let's go look for one."
     "All right." Matahachi bounced his mother lightly on his back as he
walked. "Say, Mama, you're light! Very light! Much lighter than a rock!"
