The Butterfly in Winter


        Akemi slipped out of the inn at Sumiyoshi without telling anybody. She
felt like a bird freed from its cage but was still not sufficiently recovered from
her brush with death to fly too high. The scars left by Seijūrō's violence would
not heal quickly; he had shattered her cherished dream of giving herself
unblemished to the man she really loved.
        On the boat up the Yodo to Kyoto, she felt that all the waters of the river
would not equal the tears she wanted to shed. As other boats, loaded with
ornaments and supplies for the New Year celebration, rowed busily past, she
stared at them and thought: "Now, even if I do find Musashi ..." Her troubled
eyes filled and overflowed. No one could ever know how eagerly she had
anticipated the New Year's morning when she would find him on the Great
Bridge at Gojō Avenue.
        Her longing for Musashi had grown deeper and stronger. The thread of
love had lengthened, and she had wound it up into a ball inside her breast.
Through all the years, she had gone on spinning the thread from distant
memories and bits of hearsay and winding it around the ball to make it larger and
larger. Until only a few days earlier, she had treasured her girlish sentiments and
carried them with her like a fresh wild flower from the slopes of Mount Ibuki;
now the blossom inside her was crushed. Though it was unlikely anyone was
aware of what had occurred, she imagined everybody was looking at her with
knowing eyes.
        In Kyoto, in the fading light of evening, Akemi walked among the leafless
willows and miniature pagodas in Teramachi, near Gojō Avenue, looking as cold
and forlorn as a butterfly in winter.
        "Hey, beautiful!" said a man. "Your obi cord is loose. Don't you want me
to tie it for you?" He was thin, shabbily clothed and uncouth of speech, but he
wore the two swords of a samurai.
        Akemi had never seen him before, but habitués of the drinking places
nearby could have told her that his name was Akakabe Yasoma, and that he hung
around the back streets on winter nights doing nothing. His worn straw sandals
flapped as he ran up behind Akemi and picked up the loose end of obi cord.
        "What are you doing all by yourself in this deserted place? I don't suppose

you're one of those madwomen who appear in the kyōgen plays, are you? You've
got a pretty face. Why don't you fix your hair up a little and stroll about like the
other girls?" Akemi walked on, pretending to have no ears, but Yasoma mistook
this for shyness. "You look like a city girl. What did you do? Run away from
home? Or do you have a husband you're trying to escape from?"
       Akemi made no reply.
       "You should be careful, a pretty girl like you, wandering around in a daze,
looking as though you're in trouble or something. You can't tell what might
happen. We don't have the kind of thieves and ruffians who used to hang out
around Rashōmon, but there are plenty of freebooters, and their mouths water at
the sight of a woman. And vagrants too, and people who buy and sell women.
       Although Akemi said not a word, Yasoma persisted, answering his own
questions when necessary.
       "It's really quite dangerous. They say women from Kyoto are being sold
for very high prices in Edo now. A long time ago, they used to take women from
here up to Hiraizumi in the northeast, but now it's Edo. That's because the
second shōgun, Hidetada, is building up the city as fast as he can. The brothels in
Kyoto are all opening up branches there now."
       Akemi said nothing.
       "You'd stand out anywhere, so you should be careful. If you don't watch
out, you might get involved with some scoundrel. It's terribly dangerous!"
      Akemi had had enough. Throwing her sleeves up on her shoulders in anger,
      she turned and hissed loudly at him.
      Yasoma just laughed. "You know," he said, "I think you really are crazy."
      "Shut up and go away!"
      "Well, aren't you?"
      "You're the crazy one!"
       "Ha, ha, ha! That as much as proves it. You're crazy. I feel sorry for you."
"If you don't get out of here, I'll throw a rock at you!"
       "Aw, you don't want to do that, do you?"
       "Go away, you beast!" The proud front she was putting up masked the
terror she actually felt. She screamed at Yasoma and ran into a field of
miscanthus, where once had stood Lord Komatsu's mansion and its garden filled
with stone lanterns. She seemed to swim through the swaying plants.
       "Wait!" cried Yasoma, going after her like a hunting dog.
       Above Toribe Hill rose the evening moon, looking like the wild grin of a
she-demon.

        There was no one in the immediate vicinity. The nearest people were about
three hundred yards away, in a group slowly descending a hill, but they wouldn't
have come to her rescue even if they had heard her shouts, for they were
returning from a funeral. Clad in formal white clothing and hats tied with white
ribbons, they carried their prayer beads in their hands; a few of them were still
weeping.
        Suddenly Akemi, pushed sharply from behind, stumbled and fell.
        "Oh, I'm sorry," said Yasoma. He fell on top of her, apologizing all the
while. "Did it hurt?" he asked solicitously, hugging her to him.
        Seething with anger, Akemi slapped his bearded face, but this did not faze
him. Indeed, he seemed to like it. He merely squinted and grinned as she struck.
Then he hugged her more closely and rubbed his cheek against hers. His beard
felt like a thousand needles sticking into her skin. She could barely breathe. As
she scratched desperately at him, one of her fingernails clawed the inside of his
nose, bringing forth a stream of blood. Still, Yasoma did not relax the tight hold
he had on her.
        The bell at the Amida Hall on Toribe Hill was tolling a dirge, a
lamentation on the impermanence of all things and the vanity of life. But it made
no impression on the two struggling mortals. The withered miscanthus waved
violently with their movements.
        "Calm down, stop fighting," he pleaded. "There's nothing to be afraid of.
I'll make you my bride. You'd like that, wouldn't you?"
        Akemi screamed, "I just want to die!" The misery in her voice startled
Yasoma.
        "Why? Wh-what's the matter?" he stammered.
        Akemi's crouching position, with her hands, knees and chest drawn tightly
together, resembled the bud of a sasanqua flower. Yasoma began to comfort and
cajole, hoping to soothe her into surrender. This did not seem to be the first time
he had encountered a situation of this sort. On the contrary, it would appear that
this was something he liked, for his face shone with pleasure, without losing its
menacing quality. He was in no hurry; like a cat, he enjoyed playing with his
victim.
        "Don't cry," he said. "There's nothing to cry about, is there?" Giving her a
kiss on the ear, he went on, "You must have been with a man before. At your
age, you couldn't be innocent."
       Seijūrō! Akemi recalled how stifled and miserable she had been before,
       how the framework of the shoji had blurred before her eyes.

       "Wait!" she said.
       "Wait? All right, I'll wait," he said, mistaking the warmth of her feverish
       body for passion. "But don't try to run away, or I'll really get rough."
       With a sharp grunt, she twisted her shoulders and shook his hand off her.
       Glaring into his face, she slowly rose. "What are you trying to do to me?"
       "You know what I want!"
        "You think you can treat women like fools, don't you? All you men do!
Well, I may be a woman, but I've got spirit." Blood seeped from her lip where
she had cut it on a miscanthus leaf. Biting the lip, she burst into fresh tears.
        "You say the strangest things," he said. "What else can you be but crazy?"
        "I'll say whatever I please!" she screamed. Pushing his chest away from
her with all her might, she scrambled away through the miscanthus, which
stretched as far as she could see in the moonlight.
        "Murder! Help! Murder!"
        Yasoma lunged after her. Before she had gone ten steps, he caught her and
threw her down again. Her white legs visible beneath her kimono, her hair
falling around her face, she lay with her cheek pressed against the ground. Her
kimono was half open, and her white breasts felt the cold wind.
        Just as Yasoma was about to leap on her, something very hard landed in
the vicinity of his ear. Blood rushed to his head, and he screamed out in pain. As
he turned to look, the hard object came crashing down on the crown of his head.
This time there could hardly have been any pain, for he immediately fell over
unconscious, his head shaking emptily like a paper tiger's. As he lay there with
his mouth slack, his assailant, a mendicant priest, stood over him, holding the
shakuhachi with which he had dealt the blows.
        "The evil brute!" he said. "But he went down easier than I expected." The
priest looked at Yasoma for a time, debating whether it would be kinder to kill
him outright. The chances were that even if he recovered consciousness, he
would never be sane again.
        Akemi stared blankly at her rescuer. Apart from the shakuhachi, there was
nothing to identify him as a priest; to judge from his dirty clothes and the sword
hanging at his side, he might have been a poverty-stricken samurai or even a
beggar.
        "It's all right now," he said. "You don't have to worry anymore."
        Recovering from her daze, Akemi thanked him and began straightening
her hair and her kimono. But she peered into the darkness around her with eyes
still full of fright.

       "Where do you live?" asked the priest.
       "Eh? Live ... do you mean where's my house?" she said, covering her face
with her hands. Through her sobs, she tried to answer his questions, but she
found herself unable to be honest with him. Part of what she told him was true—
her mother was different from her, her mother was trying to exchange her body
for money, she had fled here from Sumiyoshi—but the rest was made up on the
spur of the moment.
       "I'd rather die than go back home," she wailed. "I've had to put up with so
much from my mother! I've been shamed in so many ways! Why, even when I
was a little girl, I had to go out on the battlefield and steal things from the bodies
of dead soldiers."
       Her loathing for her mother made her bones tremble.
       Aoki Tanzaemon helped her along to a little hollow, where it was quiet and
the wind less chilly. Coming to a small dilapidated temple, he flashed a toothy
grin and said, "This is where I live. It's not much, but I like it."
       Though aware that it was a little rude, Akemi could not help saying, "Do
you really live here?"
       Tanzaemon pushed open a grille door and motioned for her to enter.
Akemi hesitated.
       "It's warmer inside than you'd think," he said. "All I have to cover the floor
with is thin straw matting. Still, that's better than nothing. Are you afraid I might
be like that brute back there?"
       Silently Akemi shook her head. Tanzaemon did not frighten her. She felt
sure he was a good man, and anyway he was getting on—over fifty, she thought.
What held her back was the filthiness of the little temple and the smell of
Tanzaemon's body and clothing. But there was nowhere else to go, no telling
what might happen if Yasoma or someone like him were to find her. And her
forehead was burning with fever.
      "I won't be a bother to you?" she asked as she went up the steps.
      "Not at all. No one will mind if you stay here for months."
      The building was pitch black, the kind of atmosphere favored by bats. "Wait
      just a minute," said Tanzaemon.
       She heard the scratching of metal against flint, and then a small lamp,
which he must have scavenged somewhere, cast a feeble light. She looked about
and saw that this strange man had somehow accumulated the basic necessities
for housekeeping—a pot or two, some dishes, a wooden pillow, some straw
matting. Saying he would make a little buckwheat gruel for her, he began

puttering around with a broken earthenware brazier, first putting in a little
charcoal, then some sticks, and after raising a few sparks, blowing them into a
flame.
       "He's a nice old man," thought Akemi. As she began to feel calmer, the
place no longer seemed so filthy.
       "There now," he said. "You look feverish, and you said you were tired.
You've probably caught a cold. Why don't you just lie down over there until the
food is ready?" He pointed to a makeshift pallet of straw matting and rice sacks.
       Akemi spread some paper she had with her on the wooden pillow and with
murmured apologies for resting while he worked, lay down. For cover, there
were the tattered remains of a mosquito net. She started to pull this over her, but
as she did so, an animal with glittering eyes jumped out from under it and
bounded over her head. Akemi screamed and buried her face in the pallet.
       Tanzaemon was more astonished than Akemi. He dropped the sack from
which he was pouring flour into the water, spilling half of it on his knees. "What
was that?" he cried.
      Akemi, still hiding her face, said, "I don't know. It seemed bigger than a
      rat."
      "Probably a squirrel. They sometimes come when they smell food. But I
      don't see it anywhere."
      Lifting her head slightly, Akemi said, "There it is!"
      "Where?"
       Tanzaemon straightened up and turned around. Perched on the railing of
the inner sanctum, from which the image of the Buddha was long gone, was a
small monkey, shrinking with fright under Tanzaemon's hard stare.
       Tanzaemon looked puzzled, but the monkey apparently decided there was
nothing to fear. After a few trips up and down the faded vermilion railing, he sat
down again, and turning up a face like a peach with long hair, began blinking his
eyes.
       "Where do you suppose he came from? ... Ah ha! I see now. I thought a
good deal of rice had been scattered around." He moved toward the monkey, but
the latter, anticipating his approach, bounded behind the sanctum and hid.
       "He's a cute little devil," said Tanzaemon. "If we give him something to
eat, he probably won't do any mischief. Let's let him be." Brushing the flour off
his knees, he sat down before the brazier again. "There's nothing to be afraid of,
Akemi. Get some rest."
      "Do you think he'll behave himself?"

      "Yes. He's not wild. He must be somebody's pet. There's nothing to worry
      about. Are you warm enough?"
      "Yes."
      "Then get some sleep. That's the best cure for a cold."
       He put more flour in the water and stirred the gruel with chopsticks. The
fire was burning briskly now, and while the mixture was heating up, he began
chopping some scallions. His chopping board was the top of an old table, his
knife a small rusted dagger. With unwashed hands, he scooped the scallions into
a wooden bowl and then wiped off the chopping block, converting it into a tray.
       The bubbling of the boiling pot gradually warmed the room. Seated with
his arms around his spindly knees, the former samurai gazed at the broth with
hungry eyes. He looked happy and eager, as though the pot before him contained
the ultimate pleasure of mankind.
       The bell of Kiyomizudera pealed as it did every night. The winter
austerities, which lasted thirty days, had ended, and the New Year was at hand,
but as always as the year drew to a close, the burden on people's souls seemed to
grow heavier. Far into the night supplicants were sounding the tinny gong above
the temple entrance as they bowed to pray, and wailing chants invoking the
Buddha's aid droned on monotonously.
       While Tanzaemon slowly stirred the gruel to keep it from scorching, he
turned reflective. "I myself am receiving my punishment and atoning for my
sins, but what has happened to Jōtarō? ... The child did nothing blameworthy.
Oh, Blessed Kannon, I beg you to punish the parent for his sins, but cast the eye
of generous compassion on the son—"
       A scream suddenly punctuated his prayer. "You beast!" Her eyes still
closed in sleep, her face pressed hard against the wooden pillow, Akemi was
weeping bitterly. She ranted on until the sound of her own voice woke her.
       "Was I talking in my sleep?" she asked.
       "Yes; you startled me," said Tanzaemon, coming to her bedside and wiping
her forehead with a cool rag. "You're sweating terribly. Must be the fever."
"What ... what did I say?"
      "Oh, a lot of things."
      "What sort of things?" Akemi's feverish face grew redder from
      embarrassment. She pulled the cover up over it.
      Without answering directly, Tanzaemon said, "Akemi, there's a man you'd
      like to put a curse on, isn't there?"
      "Did I say that?"

      "Mm. What happened? Did he desert you?"
      "No."
      "I see," he said, jumping to his own conclusion.
       Akemi, pushing herself up into a half-sitting position, said, "Oh, what
should I do now? Tell me, what?" She had vowed she would reveal her secret
shame to no one, but the anger and sadness, the sense of loss pent up inside her,
were too much to bear alone. She sprawled on Tanzaemon's knee and blurted out
the whole story, sobbing and moaning throughout.
       "Oh," she wailed finally, "I want to die, die! Let me die!"
       Tanzaemon's breath grew hot. It had been a long time since he had been
this close to a woman; her odor burned his nostrils, his eyes. Desires of the flesh,
which he thought he had overcome, began to swell as from an influx of warm
blood, and his body, until now no more vibrant than a barren withered tree, took
on new life. He was reminded, for a change, that there were lungs and a heart
underneath his ribs.
       "Mm," he muttered, "so that's the kind of man Yoshioka Seijūrō is." Bitter
hatred for Seijūrō welled up in him. Nor was it only indignation; a kind of
jealousy moved him to tighten his shoulders, as though it were a daughter of his
own who had been violated. As Akemi writhed in tears on his knee, he
experienced a feeling of intimacy, and a look of perplexity crept into his face.
       "Now there, don't cry. Your heart is still chaste. It's not as if you'd
permitted this man to make love to you, nor did you return his love. What's
important to a woman is not her body but her heart, and chastity itself is a matter
of the inner being. Even when a woman doesn't give herself to a man, if she
regards him with lust, she becomes, at least as long as the feeling lasts, unchaste
and unclean."
       Akemi was not comforted by these abstract words. Hot tears seeped
through the priest's kimono, and she went on repeating that she wanted to die.
       "Now, now, stop crying," said Tanzaemon again, patting her on the back.
But the trembling of her white neck did not move him to genuine sympathy. This
soft skin, so sweet to the smell, had already been stolen from him by another
man.
       Noticing that the monkey had sneaked up to the pot and was eating
something, he unceremoniously removed Akemi's head from his knee, shook his
fist and cursed the animal roundly. Beyond the shadow of a doubt, food was
more important than a woman's suffering.

        The next morning Tanzaemon announced he was going to town with his
beggar's bowl. "You stay here while I'm gone," he said. "I have to get some
money to buy you medicine, and then we need some rice and oil so we can have
something hot to eat."
        His hat was not a deep one woven of reeds, like those of most itinerant
priests, but an ordinary bamboo affair, and his straw sandals, worn and split at
the heels, scraped against the ground as he shuffled along. Everything about him,
not just his mustache, had an air of scruffiness. Yet, walking scarecrow that he
was, it was his habit to go out every day, unless it rained.
        Not having slept well, he was particularly bleary-eyed this morning.
Akemi, after crying and carrying on so in the evening, had later sipped her gruel,
broken into a heavy sweat and slept soundly through the rest of the night. He had
hardly closed his eyes until dawn. Even walking under the bright morning sun,
the cause of his sleeplessness remained with him. He could not get it out of his
mind.
        "She's about the same age as Otsū," he thought. "But they're completely
different in temperament. Otsū has grace and refinement, but there's something
chilly about her. Akemi's appealing whether she's laughing, crying or pouting."
        The youthful feelings aroused in Tanzaemon's desiccated cells by the
strong rays of Akemi's charm had made him all too conscious of his advancing
years. And during the night, as he had looked solicitously at her each time she
stirred in her sleep, a different warning had sounded in his heart. "What a
wretched fool I am! Haven't I learned yet? Though I wear the surplice of the
priest and play the shakuhachi of the mendicant, I'm still a long way from
achieving the clear and perfect enlightenment of P'u-hua. Will I never find the
wisdom that will release me from this body?"
        After castigating himself at length, he had forced his sad eyes shut and
tried to sleep, but to no avail.
        As dawn broke, he had again resolved, "I will—I must—put evil thoughts
behind me!" But Akemi was a charming girl. She had suffered so. He must try to
comfort her. He had to show her that not all the men in the world were demons
of lust.
        Besides the medicine, he was wondering what sort of present he could
bring her when he came back in the evening. Throughout the day's alms-seeking,
his spirit would be bolstered by this desire to do something to make Akemi a
little happier. That would suffice; he cherished no greater desire.

        At about the time he recovered his composure and the color returned to his
face, he heard the flapping of wings above the cliff beside him. The shadow of a
large falcon skimmed past, and Tanzaemon watched a gray feather from a small
bird flutter down from an oak branch in the leafless grove above him. Holding
the bird in its claws, the falcon rose straight up, exposing the undersides of its
wings.
        Nearby a man's voice said, "Success!" and the falconer whistled to his
bird.
        Seconds later, Tanzaemon saw two men in hunting outfits coming down
the hill behind the Ennenji. The falcon was perched on the left fist of one of
them, who carried a net bag for the catch on the side opposite his two swords.
An intelligent-looking brown hunting dog trotted along behind.
        Kojirō stopped and took in the surroundings. "It happened somewhere
along here yesterday evening," he was saying. "My monkey was scrapping with
the dog, and the dog bit his tail. He hid somewhere and never came out. I
wonder if he's up in one of those trees."
        Seijūrō, looking rather disgruntled, sat down on a rock. "Why would he
still be here? He's got legs too. Anyway, I can't see why you bring a monkey
along when you go hunting with falcons."
        Kojirō made himself comfortable on the root of a tree. "I didn't bring him,
but I can't keep him from tagging along. And I'm so used to him, I miss him
when he's not around."
        "I thought only women and people of leisure liked to have monkeys and
lapdogs for pets, but I guess I was wrong. It's hard to imagine a student warrior
like you being so attached to a monkey." Having seen Kojirō in action on the
dike at Kema, Seijūrō had a healthy respect for his swordsmanship, but his tastes
and his general way of life seemed all too boyish. Just living in the same house
with him these past few days had convinced Seijūrō that maturity came only
with age. While he found it difficult to respect Kojirō as a person, this, in a way,
made it easier to associate with him.
        Kojirō replied laughingly, "It's because I'm so young. One of these days,
I'll learn to like women, and then I'll probably forget all about the monkey."
        Kojirō chatted idly in a light vein, but Seijūrō's face seemed increasingly
preoccupied. There was a nervous look in his eyes not unlike that of the falcon
perched on his hand. All at once he said irritably, "What's that beggar priest over
there doing? He's been standing there staring at us ever since we got here."
Seijūrō glared suspiciously at Tanzaemon, and Kojirō turned around to have a

look.
       Tanzaemon turned his back and trudged off.
       Seijūrō stood up abruptly. "Kojirō," he said, "I want to go home. Any way
you look at it, this is no time to be out hunting. It's already the twenty-ninth of
the month."
       Laughing, with a touch of scorn, Kojirō said, "We came out to hunt, didn't
we? We've only got one turtledove and a couple of thrushes to show for it. We
should try farther up the hill."
       "No; let's call it a day. I don't feel like hunting, and when I don't feel like it,
the falcon doesn't fly right. Let's go back to the house and practice." He added,
as though talking to himself, "That's what I need to do, practice."
       "Well, if you must go back, I'll go with you." He walked along beside
Seijūrō but did not seem very happy about it. "I guess I was wrong to suggest it."
       "Suggest what?"
       "Going hunting yesterday and today."
       "Don't worry about it. I know you meant well. It's just that it's the end of
the year, and the showdown with Musashi is creeping up on us fast."
       "That's why I thought it'd be good for you to do some hunting. You could
relax, get yourself into the proper spirit. I guess you're not the type who can do
that."
       "Umm. The more I hear about Musashi, the more I think it's just as well
not to underrate him."
       "Isn't that all the more reason to avoid getting excited or panicky? You
should discipline your spirit."
       "I'm not panicky. The first lesson in the Art of War is not to make light of
your enemy, and I think it's only common sense to try to get in plenty of practice
before the fight. If I should lose, then at least I'd know I'd done my best. If the
man's better than I am, well ... "
       Though he appreciated Seijūrō's honesty, Kojirō sensed in him a smallness
of spirit that would make it very difficult for Seijūrō to uphold the reputation of
the Yoshioka School. Because Seijūrō lacked the personal vision needed to
follow in his father's footsteps and run the huge school properly, Kojirō felt sorry
for him. In his opinion, the younger brother, Denshichirō, had more strength of
character, but Denshichirō was also an incorrigible playboy. And though he was
a more capable swordsman than Seijūrō, he had no stake in the Yoshioka name.
       Kojirō wanted Seijūrō to forget about the impending bout with Musashi,
for this, he believed, would be the best possible preparation for him. The

question he wanted to ask, but didn't, was what could he hope to learn between
now and the time for the match? "Well," he thought with resignation, "that's the
way he is, so I suppose I can't be of much help to him."
       The dog had run off and was barking ferociously in the distance. "That
means he's found some game!" said Kojirō, his eyes brightening. "Let him go.
He'll catch up with us later."
       "I'll go have a look. You wait here."
       Kojirō sprinted off in the direction of the barking and after a minute or two
spotted the dog on the veranda of an ancient ramshackle temple. The animal
leaped against the dilapidated grille door and fell back. After a few trials, he
began scratching at the worn red-lacquered posts and walls of the building.
       Wondering what he could possibly be so excited about, Kojirō went to
another door. Peering through the grille was like looking into a black lacquer
vase.
       The rattle of the door as he pulled it open brought the dog running to his
heels, wagging his tail. Kojirō kicked the dog away, but to little effect. As he
entered the building, the dog streaked in past him.
       The woman's screams were ear-splitting, the kind of screams that shatter
glass. Then the dog started howling, and there was a battle of lung power
between him and the shrieking woman. Kojirō wondered if the beams would
split. Running forward, he discovered Akemi lying under the mosquito net and
the monkey, which had jumped in the window to escape the dog, hiding behind
her.
       Akemi was between the dog and the monkey, blocking the dog's way, so
he attacked her. As she rolled to one side, the howl of the dog reached a
crescendo.
       Akemi was now screaming from pain rather than fright. The dog had set
his teeth around her forearm. Kojirō, with an oath, kicked him violently again in
the ribs. The dog was already dead from the first kick, but even after the second,
his teeth were solidly clamped on Akemi's arm.
       "Let go! Let go!" she screamed, writhing on the floor.
       Kojirō knelt beside her and pulled the dog's jaws open. The sound was like
that of pieces of glued wood being wrenched apart. The mouth came open, all
right; a little more force on Kojirō's part, and the dog's head would have split in
two. He threw the corpse out the door and came back to Akemi's side.
       "It's all right now," he said soothingly, but Akemi's forearm said otherwise.
The blood flowing over the white skin gave the bite the appearance of a large

crimson peony.
      Kojirō shivered at the sight. "Isn't there any sake? I should wash it with
sake.... No, I guess there wouldn't be any in a place like this." Warm blood
flowed down the forearm to the wrist. "I have to do something," he said, "or
poison from the dog's teeth might cause you to go mad. He has been acting
peculiarly these past few days."
      While Kojirō tried to decide what could be done in a hurry, Akemi
screwed her eyebrows together, bent her lovely white neck backward and cried,
"Mad? Oh, how wonderful! That's what I want to be—mad! Completely stark,
raving mad!"
      "Wh-wh-what's this?" stammered Kojirō. Without further ado, he bent
over her forearm and sucked blood from the wound. When his mouth was full,
he spat it out, put his mouth back to the white skin, and sucked until his cheeks
bulged.


       In the evening Tanzaemon returned from his daily round. "I'm back,
Akemi," he announced as he entered the temple. "Were you lonesome while I
was gone?"
       He deposited her medicine in a corner, along with the food and the jar of
oil he had bought, and said, "Wait a moment; I'll make some light."
       When the candle was lit, he saw that she was not in the room. "Akemi!" he
called. "Where could she have gone?"
       His one-sided love turned suddenly to anger, which was quickly replaced
by loneliness. Tanzaemon was reminded, as he had been before, that he would
never be young again—that there was no more honor, no more hope. He thought
of his aging body and winced.
       "I rescued her and took care of her," he grumbled, "and now she's gone off
without a word. Is that the way the world is always going to be? Is that the way
she is? Or was she still suspicious of my intentions?"
       On the bed he discovered a scrap of cloth, apparently torn from the end of
her obi. The spot of blood on it rekindled his animal instincts. He kicked the
straw matting into the air and threw the medicine out the window.
       Hungry, but lacking the will to prepare a meal, he took up his shakuhachi
and, with a sigh, went out onto the veranda. For an hour or more, he played
without stopping, attempting to expel his desires and delusions. Yet it was
evident to him that his passions remained with him and would remain with him

until he died. "She'd already been taken by another man," he mused. "Why did I
have to be so moral and upright? There was no need for me to lie there alone,
pining all night."
       Half of him regretted not having acted; the other half condemned his
lecherous yearning. It was precisely this conflict of emotions, swirling
incessantly in his veins, that constituted what the Buddha called delusion. He
was trying now to cleanse his impure nature, but the more he strived, the
muddier the tone of his shakuhachi became.
       The beggar who slept beneath the temple poked his head from under the
veranda. "Why are you sitting there playing your recorder?" he asked. "Did
something good happen? If you made lots of money and bought some sake, how
about giving me a drink?" He was a cripple, and from his lowly viewpoint,
Tanzaemon lived like a king.
       "Do you know what happened to the girl I brought home last night?"
       "She was a nice-looking wench, wasn't she? If I'd been able, I wouldn't
have let her get away. Not long after you left this morning, a young samurai with
a long forelock and a huge sword on his back came and took her away. The
monkey too. He had one of them on one shoulder, one on the other."
      "Samurai ... forelock?"
      "Uh. And what a handsome fellow he was—handsomer by far than you and
      me!"
      The humor of this sent the beggar into a paroxysm of laughter.
