An Offering for the Dead


        When Oda Nobunaga finally lost patience with the priests' political
machinations, he attacked the ancient Buddhist establishment on Mount Hiei,
and in one horrendous night, all but a few of its three thousand temples and
shrines had gone up in flames. Though four decades had passed and the main
hall and a number of secondary temples had been rebuilt, the memory of that
night hung like a shroud over the mountain. The establishment was now stripped
of its temporal powers, and the priests devoted their time once again to religious
duties.
        Situated on the southernmost peak, commanding a view of the other
temples and of Kyoto itself, was a small, secluded temple known as the Mudōji.
It was rare for the stillness to be broken by any sound less peaceful than the
rippling of a brook or the chirping of small birds.
        From the inner recesses of the temple came a masculine voice reciting the
words of Kannon, the Goddess of Mercy, as revealed in the Lotus Sutra. The
monotone would rise gradually for a time, then, as if the chanter had suddenly
remembered himself, sink abruptly.
        Along the jet black floor of the corridor walked a white-robed acolyte,
carrying at eye level a tray on which had been placed the meager, meatless meal
customarily served in religious establishments. Entering the room from which
the voice was coming, he placed the tray in one corner, knelt politely and said,
"Good day, sir."
        Leaning slightly forward, absorbed in his work, the guest did not hear the
boy's greeting.
        "Sir," said the acolyte, raising his voice slightly, "I've brought your lunch.
I'll leave it here in the corner, if you wish."
       "Oh, thank you," replied Musashi, straightening up. "That's very kind of
       you." He turned and bowed.
       "Would you like to eat now?"
       "Yes."
       "Then I'll serve you your rice."
        Musashi accepted the bowl of rice and began eating. The acolyte stared
first at the block of wood by Musashi's side, then at the small knife behind him.

Chips and slivers of fragrant white sandalwood lay scattered about.
      "What are you carving?" he asked.
      "It's to be a sacred image."
      "The Buddha Amida?"
       "No. Kannon. Unfortunately, I don't know anything about sculpture. I
seem to be cutting my hands more than the wood." He held out a couple of well-
nicked fingers as evidence, but the boy seemed more interested in the white
bandage around his forearm.
       "How are your wounds?" he asked.
       "Thanks to the good treatment I've received here, they're about healed now.
Please tell the head priest I am very grateful."
       "If you're carving an image of Kannon, you should visit the main hall.
There's a statue of Kannon by a very famous sculptor. If you'd like, I'll take you
there. It's not far—only half a mile or so."
       Delighted by the offer, Musashi finished his meal, and the two of them
started for the main hall. Musashi had not been outdoors in the ten days since
he'd arrived, covered with blood and using his sword as a cane. He'd barely
begun to walk when he discovered his wounds were not so thoroughly healed as
he had thought. His left knee ached, and the breeze, though light and cool,
seemed to cut into the gash on his arm. But it was pleasant outside. Blossoms
falling from the gently swaying cherry trees danced in the air like snowflakes.
The sky showed signs of the azure hue of early summer. Musashi's muscles
swelled as if they were buds about to burst open.
      "Sir, you're studying the martial arts, aren't you?"
      "That's right."
      "Then why are you carving an image of Kannon?"
      Musashi did not answer immediately.
      "Instead of carving, wouldn't it be better to spend your time practicing
      swordsmanship?"
      The question pained Musashi more than his wounds. The acolyte was about
      the same age as Genjirō, and about the same size.
       How many men had been killed or wounded on that fateful day? He could
only guess. He had no clear memory even of how he had extricated himself from
the fighting and found a place to hide. The only two things that stuck quite
clearly in his mind, haunting him in his sleep, were Genjirō's terrified scream
and the sight of his mutilated body.
       He thought again, as he had several times in the past few days, of the

resolution in his notebook: he would do nothing that he would later regret. If he
took the view that what he had done was inherent in the Way of the Sword, a
bramble lying on his chosen path, then he would have to assume that his future
would be bleak and inhuman.
       In the peaceful atmosphere of the temple, his mind had cleared. And once
the memory of spilled blood and gore began to fade, he was overcome by grief
for the boy he had slaughtered.
       His mind coming back to the acolyte's question, he said, "Isn't it true that
great priests, like Kōbō Daishi and Genshin, made lots of images of the Buddha
and bodhisattvas? I understand quite a few statues here on Mount Hiei were
carved by priests. What do you think of that?"
       Cocking his head, the boy said uncertainly, "I'm not sure, but priests do
make religious paintings and statues."
       "Let me tell you why. It's because by painting a picture or carving an
image of the Buddha, they draw closer to him. A swordsman can purify his spirit
in the same way. We human beings all look up at the same moon, but there are
many roads we may travel to reach the top of the peak nearest it. Sometimes,
when we lose our way, we decide to try someone else's, but the ultimate aim is to
find fulfillment in life."
       Musashi paused, as though he might have more to say, but the acolyte ran
ahead and pointed to a rock almost hidden in the grass. "Look," he said. "This
inscription is by Jichin. He was a priest—a famous one."
       Musashi read the words carved on the moss-covered stone:


           The water of the Law
           Will presently run shallow.
           At the very end
           A cold, bleak wind will blow on
           The barren peaks of Hiei.


      He was impressed by the writer's powers of prophecy. The wind on Mount
Hiei had indeed been cold and bleak since Nobunaga's merciless raid. There
were rumors that some of the clergy longed for the old days, for a powerful
army, political influence and special privileges, and it was a fact that they never
selected a new abbot without a lot of intrigue and ugly internal conflict. While

the holy mountain was dedicated to the salvation of the sinful, it actually
depended on the alms and donations of the sinful for its survival. Altogether not
a very happy state of affairs, mused Musashi.
       "Let's go," said the boy impatiently.
       As they started to walk on, one of the priests from the Mudōji came
running after them. "Seinen!" he called to the boy. "Where are you going?"
       "To the main hall. He wants to see a statue of Kannon."
       "Couldn't you take him some other time?"
       "Forgive me for bringing the boy with me when he probably has work to
do," said Musashi. "By all means take him back with you. I can go to the main
hall anytime."
      "I didn't come for him. I'd like you to come back with me, if you don't
      mind."
      "Me?"
      "Yes, I'm sorry to bother you, but ... "
       "Has somebody come looking for me?" asked Musashi, not at all
surprised. "Well, yes. I told them you weren't in, but they said they'd just seen
you with Seinen. They insisted I come and get you."
       On the way back to the Mudōji, Musashi asked the priest who his visitors
were and learned that they were from the Sannōin, another of the subsidiary
temples.
       There were about ten of them, dressed in black robes and wearing brown
headbands. Their angry faces might well have belonged to the dreaded warrior-
priests of old, a haughty race of bullies in clerical robes who had had their wings
clipped but apparently had rebuilt their nest. Those who had failed to profit from
Nobunaga's lesson swaggered about with great swords at their sides, lording it
over others, calling themselves scholars of the Buddhist Law but being in fact
intellectual ruffians.
      "There he is," said one.
      "Him?" asked another contemptuously.
      They stared with undisguised hostility.
       A burly priest, motioning to Musashi's guides with his lance, said,
"Thanks. You're not needed. Go inside the temple!" Then, very gruffly, "Are you
Miyamoto Musashi?"
       There was no courtesy in the words. Musashi replied curtly, without
bowing.
       Another priest, appearing from behind the first, declaimed, as though

reading from a text, "I shall convey to you the decision handed down by the
tribunal of the Enryakuji. It is this: 'Mount Hiei is a pure and sacred precinct,
which must not be used as a haven by those who harbor enmities and grudges.
Nor can it be offered as a refuge to base men who have engaged in dishonorable
conflicts. The Mudōji has been instructed to send you away from the mountain
immediately. If you disobey, you shall be strictly punished in accordance with
the laws of the monastery."'
       "I shall do as the monastery directs," Musashi replied in a mild tone. "But
since it is well past midday and I've made no preparations, I should like to ask
that you permit me to stay until tomorrow morning. Also, I'd like to inquire
whether this decision came from the civil authorities or from the clergy itself.
The Mudōji reported my arrival. I was told there was no objection to my staying.
I don't understand why this has changed so suddenly."
       "If you really want to know," the first priest replied, "I'll tell you. At first
we were glad to extend our hospitality because you fought alone against a large
number of men. Later, however, we received bad reports concerning you, which
forced us to reconsider. We decided we could no longer afford to provide refuge
for you."
       "Bad reports?" Musashi thought resentfully. He might have expected that.
It required no stretch of the imagination to guess that the Yoshioka School would
be vilifying him all over Kyoto. But he saw no point in trying to defend himself.
"Very well," he said coldly. "I shall leave tomorrow morning, without fail."
      As he entered the temple gate, the priests started to malign him. "Look at
      him, the evil wretch!"
      "He's a monster!"
      "Monster? Simple-minded is what he is!"
      Turning and glaring at the men, Musashi asked sharply, "What did you
      say?"
      "Oh, you heard, did you?" asked a priest defiantly.
       "Yes. And there's one thing I would like you to know. I'll comply with the
wishes of the priesthood, but I'm not going to put up with abuse from the likes of
you. Are you looking for a fight?"
       "As servants of the Buddha, we do not pick fights," came the
sanctimonious reply. "I opened my mouth, and the words came out naturally."
       "It must be the voice of heaven," said another priest.
       The next instant they were all around Musashi, cursing, taunting, even
spitting at him. He wasn't sure how long he'd be able to restrain himself. Despite

the power the warrior-priests had lost, these latter-day embodiments had lost
none of their arrogance.
      "Look at him!" sneered one of the priests. "From what the villagers said, I
thought he was a self-respecting samurai. Now I see he's only a brainless oaf! He
doesn't get angry; he doesn't even know how to speak on his own behalf."
      The longer Musashi remained silent, the more viciously the tongues
wagged. Finally, his face reddening slightly, he said, "Didn't you say something
about the voice of heaven speaking through a man?"
     "Yes; what of it?"
     "Are you suggesting heaven has spoken out against me?"
     "You've heard our decision. Don't you understand yet?"
     "No."
     "I guess you wouldn't. Having no more sense than you do, you deserve to
     be pitied. But I daresay in the next life you'll come to your senses!"
     When Musashi said nothing, the priest continued, "You'd better be careful
     after you leave the mountain. Your reputation is nothing to be proud of."
     "What does it matter what people say?"
     "Listen to him! He still thinks he's right."
     "What I did was right! I did nothing base or cowardly in my fight with the
     Yoshiokas."
     "You're talking nonsense!"
     "Did I do anything to be ashamed of? Name one thing!"
     "You have the gall to say that?"
     "I'm warning you. I'll overlook other things, but I won't permit anyone to
     belittle my sword!"
      "Very well, see if you can answer one question. We know you put up a
brave fight against overwhelming odds. We admire your brute strength. We
praise your courage in holding out against so many men. But why did you
murder a boy only thirteen years old? How could you be so inhuman as to
slaughter a mere child?"
      Musashi's face turned pale; his body suddenly felt weak.
      The priest went on. "After he lost his arm, Seijūrō became a priest.
Denshichirō you killed outright. Genjirō was the only person left to succeed
them. By murdering him, you put an end to the House of Yoshioka. Even if it
was done in the name of the Way of the Samurai, it was cruel, dastardly. You're
not good enough to be described as a monster or a demon. Do you consider
yourself human? Do you imagine you should be ranked as a samurai? Do you

even belong in this great land of the cherry blossoms?
       "No! And this is why the priesthood is expelling you. Whatever the
circumstances, slaying the child is unforgivable. A real samurai would commit
no crime like that. The stronger a samurai is, the gentler and more considerate he
is to the weak. A samurai understands and practices compassion.
       "Now go away from here, Miyamoto Musashi! As fast as you can! Mount
Hiei rejects you!"
       Their anger spent, the priests marched off in a body.
       Though he'd borne this last torrent of abuse silently, it wasn't because he
had no answer to their charges. "Whatever they say, I was right," he thought. "I
did the only thing I could to protect my convictions, which are not mistaken."
       He honestly believed in the validity of his principles and in the necessity
of upholding them. Once the Yoshiokas had set Genjirō up as their standard-
bearer, there had been no alternative to killing him. He was their general. So
long as he lived, the Yoshioka School would remain undefeated. Musashi could
have killed ten, twenty or thirty men, but unless Genjirō died, the survivors
would always claim victory. Killing the boy first made Musashi the victor, even
if he'd later been killed in the fighting.
       By the laws of swordsmanship, there was no flaw in this logic. And to
Musashi those laws were absolute.
       Nevertheless, the memory of Genjirō disturbed him profoundly, giving rise
to doubt, grief and pain. The cruelty of his act was repellent, even to himself.
       "Should I throw away my sword and live like an ordinary man?" he asked
himself, not for the first time. In the clear, early evening sky, the white petals of
the cherry blossoms fell randomly, like flakes of snow, leaving the trees looking
as vulnerable as he now felt, vulnerable to doubts about whether he should not
change his way of life. "If I give up the sword, I could live with Otsū," he
thought. But then he remembered the easygoing lives of the Kyoto townspeople
and the world inhabited by Kōetsu and Shōyū.
       "That's not for me," he said decisively.
       He went through the gate and entered his room. Seated by the lamp, he
took up his half-finished work and began carving rapidly. It was vitally
important to finish the statue. Whether the craftsmanship was expert or not, he
wanted desperately to leave something here to comfort the spirit of the departed
Genjirō.
       The lamp dimmed; he trimmed the wick. In the dead stillness of evening,
the sound of tiny chips falling on the tatami was audible. His concentration was

total, his whole being focused with perfect intensity on the point of contact with
the wood. Once he had set himself a task, it was his nature to lose himself in it
until it was completed, unmindful of boredom or fatigue.
       The tones of the sutra rose and fell.
       After each trimming of the wick, he resumed his work with an air of
devotion and reverence, like the ancient sculptors who were said to have bowed
three times to the Buddha before picking up their chisels to carve an image. His
own statue of Kannon would be like a prayer for Genjirō's happiness in the next
life and, in a sense, a humble apology to his own soul.
       Finally, he mumbled, "I guess this will do." As he straightened up and
examined the statue, the bell in the eastern pagoda sounded the second watch of
the night, which began at ten o'clock. "It's getting late," he thought, and left
immediately to pay his respects to the head priest and ask him to take custody of
the statue. The image was roughly carved, but he had put his soul into it,
weeping tears of repentance as he prayed for the dead boy's spirit.
       No sooner was he out of the room than Seinen came in to sweep the floor.
When the room was again tidy, he laid out Musashi's pallet and, broom over
shoulder, sauntered back to the kitchen. Unknown to Musashi, while he was still
carving, a catlike figure had crept into the Mudōji, through doors that were never
locked, and onto the veranda. After Seinen was out of sight, the shoji onto the
veranda slid silently open and just as silently shut.
       Musashi returned with his going-away presents, a basket hat and a pair of
straw sandals. Placing them beside his pillow, he extinguished the lamp and
crawled into bed. The outer doors were open and a breeze blew softly through
the corridors. There was just enough moonlight to give the white paper of the
shoji a dull gray hue. Tree shadows swayed gently, like waves on a calm, open
sea.
       He snored softly, breathing more slowly as he sank deeper into sleep.
Silently, the edge of a small screen in the corner shifted forward, and a dark
figure crawled stealthily out on hands and knees. The snoring halted, and the
black form quickly spread itself flat on the floor. Then, as the breathing steadied,
the intruder advanced inch by inch, patiently, cautiously, coordinating his
movements with the rhythmical breathing.
       All at once, the shadow rose like a cloud of black floss and descended on
Musashi, crying, "Now I'll teach you!" A short sword swept toward Musashi's
neck. But the weapon clattered to one side as the black form flew back through
the air and landed with a crash against the shoji. The invader emitted one loud

wail before tumbling, along with the shoji, into the darkness outside.
       At the instant Musashi made his throw, it crossed his mind that the person
in his hands was as light as a kitten. Though the face had been swathed in cloth,
he thought he had caught a glimpse se of white hair. Without pausing to analyze
these impressions, he grabbed his sword and ran out onto the veranda.
       "Stop!" he shouted. "Since you've gone to the trouble of coming here, give
me a chance to greet you properly!" Leaping to the ground, he ran swiftly toward
the sound of retreating footsteps. But his heart was not in it. After a few seconds,
he stopped and watched laughingly as some priests disappeared into the
darkness.
       Osugi, after her bone-jarring landing, lay on the ground groaning with
pain.
       "Why, Granny, it's you!" he exclaimed, surprised that his attacker was
neither a Yoshioka man nor one of the irate priests. He put his arm around her to
help her up.
       "Now I begin to understand," he said. "You're the one who told the priests
a lot of bad things about me, aren't you? And since the story came from a
courageous, upright old lady, they believed every word of it, I suppose."
       "Oh, my back hurts!" Osugi neither confirmed nor denied his accusation.
She squirmed a bit but lacked the strength to put up much resistance. Feebly she
said, "Musashi, since it's come to this, it's no use worrying about right and
wrong. The House of Hon'iden has been unlucky in war, so just cut off my head
now."
       It seemed unlikely to Musashi that she was merely being dramatic. Hers
sounded like the honest words of a woman who had gone as far as she could and
wanted to put an end to it.
       "Are you in pain?" he asked, refusing to take her seriously. "Where does it
hurt? You can stay here tonight, so there's nothing to worry about." He lifted her
in his arms, carried her inside and laid her on his pallet. Sitting by her side, he
nursed her through the night.
       When the sky lightened, Seinen brought the lunch box Musashi had
requested, along with a message from the head priest, who, while apologizing
for being rude, urged Musashi to be on his way as quickly as possible.
       Musashi sent word explaining that he now had an ailing old woman on his
hands. The priest, not wanting Osugi at the temple, offered a suggestion. It
seemed that a merchant from the town of Ōtsu had come to the temple with a
cow and left the animal in the head priest's care while he went off on a side trip.

The priest offered Musashi the use of the animal, saying that Musashi could let
the woman ride it down the mountain. In Ōtsu, the cow could be left at the wharf
or at one of the wholesale houses in the vicinity.
       Musashi accepted the offer gratefully.
