Reverberations in the Snow


       Musashi wandered about the many hallways, avoiding the brightly lit front
parlors. He came upon one dark room where bedding was kept and another full
of tools and implements. The walls seemed to exude the warmish odor of food
being prepared, but still he could not find the kitchen.
       An attendant came out of one room and held out her arms to block his way.
       "Sir, guests aren't supposed to come back here," she said firmly, with none
of the childish cuteness she might have affected in the guest rooms. "Oh!
Shouldn't I be here?"
       "Certainly not!" She gave him a shove toward the front and walked in the
same direction herself.
       "Aren't you the girl who fell in the snow a while ago? Rin'ya, isn't it?"
"Yes, I'm Rin'ya. I suppose you got lost trying to find the toilet. I'll show you
where it is." She took his hand and pulled.
      "That's not it. I'm not drunk. I'd like you to do me a favor. Take me to an
      empty room and bring me some food."
      "Food? If that's what you want, I'll take it to your parlor."
      "No, not there. Everybody's having a good time. They don't want to be
      reminded of dinner yet."
      Rin'ya cocked her head. "I suppose you're right. I'll bring you something
      here. What would you like?"
      "Nothing special; two large rice balls will do."
      She returned in a few minutes with the rice balls and served them to him in
      an unlit room.
       When he had finished, he said, "I guess I can get out of the house through
the inner garden there." Without waiting for a reply, he stood up and walked to
the veranda.
      "Where are you going, sir?"
      "Don't worry, I'll be back soon."
      "Why are you leaving by the back way?"
      "People would make a fuss if I went out the front way. And if my hosts saw
      me, it would upset them and spoil their fun."
      "I'll open the gate for you, but be sure to come back right away. If you don't,

      they'll blame me."
       "I understand. If Mr. Mizuochi should ask about me, tell him I went to the
neighborhood of the Rengeōin to see a man I know. I intend to return shortly."
       "You must come back soon. Your companion for the evening is to be
Yoshino Dayū." She opened the snow-laden folding wooden gate and let him
out.
       Directly opposite the main entrance to the gay quarter was a tea shop
called the Amigasa-jaya. Musashi stopped and asked for a pair of straw sandals,
but they had none. As the name implied, their chief business was selling basket
hats to men who wished to conceal their identity when entering the quarter.
       After sending the shopgirl to buy sandals, he sat down on the edge of a
stool and tightened his obi and the cord under it. Removing his loose-fitting coat
and folding it neatly, he borrowed paper and brush and wrote a brief note, folded
it and slipped it into the sleeve of the coat. He then called to the old man
crouched beside the hearth in the room behind the shop, whom he took to be the
proprietor. "Would you keep this coat for me? If I don't return by eleven o'clock,
please take it to the Ōgiya and give it to a man called Kōetsu. There's a letter for
him inside the sleeve."
       The man said he'd be glad to help, and on being asked, informed Musashi
it was only about seven o'clock, the watchman having just passed and announced
the hour.
       When the girl returned with the sandals, Musashi examined the thongs to
make sure the plait was not too tight, then tied them on over his leather socks.
Handing the shopkeeper more money than was necessary, he picked up a new
basket hat and went outside. Instead of tying the hat on, he held it over his head
to keep off the snow, which fell in flakes softer than cherry blossoms.


      Lights were visible along the riverbank at Shijō Avenue, but to the east, in
the Gion woods, it was pitch black, except for widely scattered patches of light
from stone lanterns. The deathly stillness was broken only sporadically, by the
noise of snow sliding off a branch.
      In front of a shrine gate about twenty men knelt in prayer, facing the
deserted buildings. The temple bells in the nearby hills had just pealed five
times, marking the hour of eight. On this particular night the loud, clear sound of
the bells seemed to penetrate to the pit of the stomach.
      "That's enough praying," said Denshichirō. "Let's be on our way."

       As they started off, one of the men asked Denshichirō if the thongs of his
sandals were all right. "On a freezing night like this, if they're too tight, they'll
break."
       "They're fine. When it's this cold, the only thing to do is use cloth thongs.
You'd better remember that."
       At the shrine, Denshichirō had completed his battle preparations, down to
the headband and the leather sleeve thong. Surrounded by his grim-faced retinue,
he strode across the snow, taking long deep breaths and emitting puffs of white
vapor.
       The challenge delivered to Musashi had specified the area behind the
Rengeōin at nine o'clock. Fearing, or professing to fear, that if they gave
Musashi any extra time he might flee, never to return, the Yoshiokas had decided
to act quickly. Hyōsuke had remained in the vicinity of Shōyū's house, but had
sent his two comrades to report on the situation.
       Approaching the Rengeōin, they saw a bonfire near the back of the temple.
"Who's that?" asked Denshichirō.
       "It's probably Ryōhei and Jūrōzaemon."
       "They're here too?" said Denshichirō with a trace of annoyance. "There are
too many of our men present. I don't want people saying Musashi lost only
because he was attacked by a large force."
       "When the time comes, we'll go away."
       The main temple building, the Sanjūsangendō, extended through thirty-
three column spans. Behind it was a large open space ideal for practicing archery
and long used for that purpose. This association with one of the martial arts was
what had induced Denshichirō to choose the Rengeōin for his encounter with
Musashi. Denshichirō and his men were satisfied with the choice. There were
some pine trees, enough to keep the landscape from being barren, but no weeds
or rushes to get in the way during the course of the fight.
       Ryōhei and Jūrōzaemon rose to greet Denshichirō, Ryōhei saying, "You've
had a cold walk, I imagine. There's still plenty of time. Sit down and warm
yourself."
       Silently, Denshichirō seated himself in the place Ryōhei had vacated. He
stretched his hands out over the flames and cracked his knuckles, one finger at a
time. "I guess I'm too early," he said. His face, warmed by the fire, had already
taken on a bloodthirsty look. Frowning, he asked, "Didn't we pass a teahouse on
the way?"
      "Yes, but it was closed."

      "One of you go and get some sake. If you knock long enough, they'll
      answer."
      "Sake, now?"
      "Yes, now. I'm cold." Moving closer to the fire, Denshichirō squatted,
      almost hugging it.
       Since no one could remember a time, morning, noon or night, when he had
appeared at the dōjō not smelling of alcohol, his drinking had come to be
accepted as a matter of course. Though the fate of the whole Yoshioka School
was at stake, one man wondered fuzzily if it wouldn't be better for him to warm
his body with a little sake than to try to wield the sword with freezing arms and
legs. Another quietly pointed out that it would be risky to disobey him, even for
his own good, and a couple of the men ran off to the teahouse. The sake they
brought was piping hot.
       "Good!" said Denshichirō. "My very best friend and ally."
       They watched nervously as he imbibed, praying he wouldn't consume as
much as usual. Denshichirō, however, stopped well short of his normal quota.
Despite his show of nonchalance, he well knew that his life was in the balance.
       "Listen! Could that be Musashi?"
       Ears pricked up.
       As the men around the fire rapidly got to their feet, a dark figure appeared
around the corner of the building. He waved his hand and shouted, "Don't worry;
it's only me."
       Though gallantly attired, with his hakama tucked up for running, he could
not disguise his age. His back was bent into the shape of a bow. When the men
could see him more clearly, they informed each other that it was only the "old
man from Mibu," and the excitement died down. The old man was Yoshioka
Genzaemon, Kempō's brother and Denshichirō's uncle.
       "Why, if it isn't Uncle Gen! What brings you here?" exclaimed
Denshichirō. It had not occurred to him that his uncle might consider his
assistance needed tonight.
       "Ah, Denshichirō," said Genzaemon, "you're really going through with it.
I'm relieved to find you here."
       "I meant to go and discuss the matter with you first, but—"
       "Discuss? What is there to discuss? The Yoshioka name has been dragged
through the mud, your brother's been made a cripple! If you'd taken no action,
you'd have had me to answer to!"
       "There's nothing to worry about. I'm not weak-kneed like my brother."

       "I'll take your word for that. And I know you'll win, but I thought I'd better
come and give you some encouragement. I ran all the way from Mibu.
Denshichirō, let me warn you, you shouldn't take this opponent too lightly, from
what I hear."
       "I'm aware of that."
       "Don't be in too much of a hurry to win. Be calm, leave it to the gods. If by
any chance you get killed, I'll take care of your body."
       "Ha, ha, ha, ha! Come, Uncle Gen, warm yourself by the fire."
       The old man silently drank a cup of sake, then addressed the others
reproachfully. "What are you doing here? Certainly you don't intend to back him
up with your swords, do you? This match is between one swordsman and
another, and it looks cowardly to have a lot of supporters around. It's almost time
now. Come with me, all of you. We'll go far enough away so it doesn't look as
though we were planning a mass attack."
       The men did as they were commanded, leaving Denshichirō alone. He sat
close to the fire, thinking: "When I heard the bells, it was eight o'clock. It must
be nine by now. Musashi's late."
       The only trace of his disciples was their black footprints in the snow; the
only sound, the crack of icicles breaking off the eaves of the temple. Once, the
branch of a tree snapped under the weight of the snow. Each time the silence was
disturbed, Denshichirō's eyes darted about like a falcon's.
       And like a falcon, a man came kicking through the snow.
       Nervous and panting, Hyōsuke said between breaths, "He's coming."
       Denshichirō knew the message before he heard it and was already on his
feet. "He's coming?" he asked parrotlike, but his feet were automatically
stamping out the last embers of the fire.
       Hyōsuke reported that Musashi had taken his time after leaving the Ōgiya,
as if oblivious of the heavy snowfall. "Just a few minutes ago he climbed the
stone steps of the Gion Shrine. I took a back street and came as fast as I could,
but even dawdling the way he was, he couldn't be far behind me. I hope you're
ready."
      "Hmm, this is it.... Hyōsuke, get away from here."
      "Where are the others?"
      "I don't know, but I don't want you here. You make me nervous."
       "Yes, sir." Hyōsuke's tone was obedient, but he did not want to leave and
made up his mind not to. After Denshichirō had trampled the fire into the slush
and turned with a tremor of excitement toward the courtyard, Hyōsuke ducked

under the floor of the temple and squatted in the darkness. Though he had not
particularly noticed the wind out in the open, here underneath the building it
whipped frigidly. Chilled to the bone, he hugged his knees and tried to deceive
himself into thinking that the chattering of his teeth and the painful shiver
running up and down his spine came from the cold alone and had nothing to do
with his fear.
       Denshichirō walked about a hundred paces from the temple and took a
solid stance, bracing one foot against the root of a tall pine tree and waiting with
palpable impatience. The warmth of the sake had worn off rapidly, and
Denshichirō felt the cold biting into his flesh. That his temper was growing
shorter was evident even to Hyōsuke, who could see the courtyard as clearly as
if it were daylight.
      A pile of snow cascaded off the branch of a tree. Denshichirō started
      nervously.
      Still Musashi did not appear.
      Finally, unable to sit still any longer, Hyōsuke came out of his hiding place
      and shouted, "What happened to Musashi?"
       "Are you still here?" Denshichirō asked angrily, but he was as irritated as
Hyōsuke and did not order him away. By tacit mutual consent, the two walked
toward each other. They stood there, looking around in all directions, time and
again one or the other saying, "I can't see him." Each time the tone grew both
angrier and more suspicious.
       "That bastard—he's run away!" exclaimed Denshichirō.
       "He couldn't have," insisted Hyōsuke, launching into an earnest
recapitulation of all he had seen and why he was sure Musashi would eventually
come.
       Denshichirō interrupted him. "What's that?" he asked, looking quickly at
one end of the temple.
       A candle was emerging shakily from the kitchen building behind the long
hall. It was in the hands of a priest, that much was clear, but they could not make
out the dim figure behind him.
       Two shadows and the speck of light, passing through the gate between the
kitchen and the main building, ascended the long veranda of the Sanjūsangendō.
       The priest was saying in a subdued voice, "Everything here is shut up at
night, so I can't say. This evening there were some samurai warming themselves
in the courtyard. They may have been the people you're asking about, but they're
gone now, as you can see."

       The other man spoke quietly. "I'm sorry to have intruded while you were
asleep. Ah, aren't there two men over there under that tree? They may be the
ones who sent word they'd wait for me here."
      "Well, it wouldn't do any harm to ask them and see."
      "I'll do that. I can find my way by myself now, so please feel free to go back
      to your room."
      "Are you joining your friends for a snow-viewing party?"
      "Something like that," said the other man with a slight laugh.
       Putting out the candle, the priest said, "I suppose I needn't say this, but if
you build a fire near the temple, as those men did earlier, please be careful and
extinguish it when you leave."
       "I'll do so without fail."
       "Very well, then. Please excuse me."
       The priest went back through the gate and shut it. The man on the veranda
stood still for a time, looking intently toward Denshichirō.
      "Hyōsuke, who is it?"
      "I can't tell, but he came from the kitchen."
      "He doesn't seem to belong to the temple."
       The two of them walked about twenty paces nearer the building. The
shadowy man moved to a point near the middle of the veranda, stopped and tied
up his sleeve. The men in the courtyard unconsciously approached close enough
to see this, but then their feet refused to go any nearer.
       After an interval of two or three breaths, Denshichirō shouted, "Musashi!"
He was well aware that the man standing several feet above him was in a very
advantageous position. Not only was he perfectly safe from the rear, but anyone
trying to attack him from either the right or the left would first have to climb up
to his level. He was thus free to devote his entire attention to the enemy before
him.
       Behind Denshichirō was open ground, snow and wind. He felt sure
Musashi would not bring anyone with him, but he could not afford to ignore the
wide space to his rear. He made a motion as though brushing something off his
kimono and said urgently to Hyōsuke, "Get away from here!" Hyōsuke moved to
the back edge of the courtyard.
       "Are you ready?" Musashi's question was calm but trenchant, falling like
so much ice water on his opponent's feverish excitement.
       Denshichirō now got his first good look at Musashi. "So this is the
bastard!" he thought. His hatred was total; he resented the maiming of his

brother, he was vexed at being compared with Musashi by the common people,
and he had an ingrained contempt for what he regarded as a country upstart
posing as a samurai.
        "Who are you to ask, 'Are you ready'? It's well past the hour of nine!" "Did
I say I'd be here exactly at nine?"
        "Don't make excuses! I've been waiting a long time. As you can see, I'm
fully prepared. Now come down from there!" He did not underestimate his
opponent to the extent of daring to attack from his present position. "In a
minute," answered Musashi with a slight laugh.
        There was a difference between Musashi's idea of preparation and his
opponent's. Denshichirō, though physically prepared, had only begun to pull
himself together spiritually, whereas Musashi had started fighting long before he
presented himself to his enemy. For him, the battle was now entering its second
and central phase. At the Gion Shrine, he had seen the footprints in the snow,
and at that moment his fighting instinct had been aroused. Knowing that the
shadow of the man following him was no longer there, he had boldly entered the
front gate of the Rengeōin and made a quick approach to the kitchen. Having
wakened the priest, he struck up a conversation, subtly questioning the man as to
what had been going on earlier in the evening. Disregarding the fact that he was
a little late, he had had some tea and warmed himself. Then when he made his
appearance, it was abrupt and from the relative safety of the veranda. He had
seized the initiative.
        His second opportunity came in the form of Denshichirō's attempt to draw
him out. One way of fighting would be to accept this; the other would be to
ignore it and create an opening of his own. Caution was in order; in a case like
this, victory is like the moon reflected on a lake. If one jumps for it impulsively,
one can drown.
        Denshichirō's exasperation knew no bounds. "Not only are you late," he
shouted; "you aren't ready. And I haven't got a decent footing here."
        Musashi, still perfectly calm, replied, "I'm coming. Just a minute."
        Denshichirō did not have to be told that anger could result in defeat, but in
the face of this deliberate effort to annoy him, he was unable to control his
emotions. The lessons he had learned in strategy deserted him.
        "Come down!" he screamed. "Here, into the courtyard! Let's stop the tricks
and fight bravely! I am Yoshioka Denshichirō! And I have nothing but spit for
makeshift tactics or cowardly attacks. If you're frightened before the match
begins, you're not qualified to confront me. Get down from there!"

       Musashi grinned. "Yoshioka Denshichirō, eh? What do I have to fear from
you? I cut you in half in the spring of last year, so if I do it again tonight, it's
only repeating what I've done before."
      "What are you talking about? Where? When?"
      "At Koyagyū in Yamato."
      "Yamato?"
      "In the bath at the Wataya Inn, to be exact."
      "Were you there?"
       "I was. We were both naked, of course, but with my eyes I calculated
whether I could cut you down or not. And with my eyes I slew you then and
there, in rather splendid fashion, if I may say so myself. You probably didn't
notice, because there were no scars left on your body, but you were defeated, no
question about it. Other people may be willing to listen to you brag about your
ability as a swordsman, but from me you'll get nothing but a laugh."
       "I was curious as to how you'd talk, and now I know—like an idiot. But
your babbling intrigues me. Come down from there, and I'll open your conceited
eyes for you!"
      "What's your weapon? Sword? Wooden sword?"
      "Why ask when you don't have a wooden sword? You came expecting to
      use a sword, didn't you?"
      "I did, but I thought if you wanted to use a wooden sword, I'd take yours
      away from you and fight with that."
      "I don't have one, you fool! Enough big talk. Fight!"
      "Ready?"
      "No!"
       Denshichirō's heels made a black slanted line about nine feet long as he
opened a space for Musashi to land in. Musashi quickly sidestepped twenty or
thirty feet along the veranda before jumping down. Then when they had moved,
swords sheathed, eyeing each other warily, about two hundred feet from the
temple, Denshichirō lost his head. Abruptly he drew and swung. His sword was
long, just the right size for his body. Making only a slight whistling sound, it
went through the air with amazing lightness, straight to the spot where Musashi
had been standing.
       Musashi was faster than the sword. Even quicker was the springing of the
glittering blade from his own scabbard. It looked as though they were too close
together for both of them to emerge unscathed, but after a moment of dancing
reflected light from the swords, they backed off.

       Several tense minutes passed. The two combatants were silent and
motionless, swords stationary in the air, point aimed at point but separated by a
distance of about nine feet. The snow piled on Denshichirō's brow dropped to his
eyelashes. To shake it off, he contorted his face until his forehead muscles
looked like countless moving bumps. His bulging eyeballs glowed like the
windows of a smelting furnace, and the exhalations of his deep, steady breathing
were as hot and gusty as those from a bellows.
       Desperation had entered his thinking, for he realized how bad his position
was. "Why am I holding the sword at eye level when I always hold it above my
head for the attack?" he asked himself. He was not thinking in the ordinary sense
of the word. His very blood, palpitating audibly through his veins, told him that.
But his whole body, down to his toenails, was concentrated in an effort to
present an image of ferocity to the enemy.
       The knowledge that the eye-level stance was not one in which he excelled
nagged him. Any number of times he itched to raise his elbows and get the
sword above his head, but it was too risky. Musashi was on the alert for just such
an opening, that tiny fraction of a second when his vision would be blocked by
his arms.
       Musashi held his sword at eye level too, with his elbows relaxed, flexible
and capable of movement in any direction. Denshichirō's arms, held in an
unaccustomed stance, were tight and rigid, and his sword unsteady. Musashi's
was absolutely still; snow began to pile up on its thin upper edge.
       As he watched hawklike for the slightest slip on his opponent's part,
Musashi counted the number of times he breathed. He not only wanted to win,
he had to win. He was acutely conscious of once again standing on the
borderline—on one side life, on the other, death. He saw Denshichirō as a
gigantic boulder, an overpowering presence. The name of the god of war,
Hachiman, passed through his mind.
       "His technique is better than mine," Musashi thought candidly. He had had
the same feeling of inferiority at Koyagyū Castle, when he had been encircled by
the four leading swordsmen of the Yagyū School. It was always this way when
he faced swordsmen of the orthodox schools, for his own technique was without
form or reason, nothing more, really, than a do-or-die method. Staring at
Denshichirō, he saw that the style Yoshioka Kempō had created and spent his
life developing had both simplicity and complexity, was well ordered and
systematic, and was not to be overcome by brute strength or spirit alone.
       Musashi was cautious about making any unnecessary movements. His

primitive tactics refused to come into play. To an extent that surprised him, his
arms rebelled against being extended. The best he could do was to maintain a
conservative, defensive stance and wait. His eyes grew red searching for an
opening, and he prayed to Hachiman for victory.
      With swelling excitement, his heart began to race. If he had been an
ordinary man, he might have been sucked into a whirlpool of confusion and
succumbed. Yet he remained steady, shaking off his sense of inadequacy as if it
were no more than snow on his sleeve. His ability to control this new
exhilaration was the result of having already survived several brushes with
death. His spirit was fully awake now, as though a veil had been removed from
before his eyes.
      Dead silence. Snow accumulated on Musashi's hair, on Denshichirō's
shoulders.
      Musashi no longer saw a great boulder before hint. He himself no longer
existed as a separate person. The will to win had been forgotten. He saw the
whiteness of the snow falling between himself and the other man, and the spirit
of the snow was as light as his own. The space now seemed an extension of his
own body. He had become the universe, or the universe had become him. He
was there, yet not there.
      Denshichirō's feet inched forward. At the tip of his sword, his willpower
quivered toward the start of a movement.
      Two lives expired with two strokes of a single sword. First, Musashi
attacked to his rear, and Otaguro Hyōsuke's head, or a piece of it, sailed past
Musashi like a great crimson cherry, as the body staggered lifelessly toward
Denshichirō. The second horrendous scream—Denshichirō's cry of attack—was
cut short midway, the broken-off sound thinning out into the space around them.
Musashi leapt so high that he appeared to have sprung from the level of his
opponent's chest. Denshichirō's big frame reeled backward and dropped in a
spray of white snow.
     Body pitifully bent, face buried in the snow, the dying man cried, "Wait!
     Wait!"
     Musashi was no longer there.
     "Hear that?"
     "It's Denshichirō!"
     "He's been hurt!"
     The black forms of Genzaemon and the Yoshioka disciples rushed across
     the courtyard like a wave.

     "Look! Hyōsuke's been killed!"
     "Denshichirō!"
      "Denshichirō!"
      Yet they knew there was no use calling, no use thinking about medical
treatment. Hyōsuke's head had been sliced sideways from the right ear to the
middle of the mouth, Denshichirō's from the top down to the right cheekbone.
All in a matter of seconds.
      "That's ... that's why I warned you," sputtered Genzaemon. "That's why I
told you not to take him lightly. Oh, Denshichirō, Denshichirō!" The old man
hugged his nephew's body, trying in vain to console it.
      Genzaemon clung to Denshichirō's corpse, but it angered him to see the
others milling about in the blood-reddened snow. "What happened to Musashi?"
he thundered.
      Some had already started searching; they saw no sign of Musashi. "He's
not here," came the answer, timid and obtuse.
      "He's around somewhere," barked Genzaemon. "He hasn't got wings. If I
don't get in a blow of revenge, I can never again hold my head up as a member
of the Yoshioka family. Find him!"
     One man gasped and pointed. The others fell back a pace and stared in the
     direction indicated.
     "It's Musashi."
     "Musashi?"
      As the idea sank in, silence filled the air, not the tranquility of a place of
worship, but an ominous, diabolical silence as though ears, eyes and brains had
ceased to function.
      Whatever the man had seen, it was not Musashi, for Musashi was standing
under the eaves of the nearest building. His eyes fixed on the Yoshioka men and
his back pressed to the wall, he edged his way along until he reached the
southwest corner of the Sanjūsangendō. He climbed onto the veranda and crept,
slowly and quietly, to the center.
      "Will they attack?" he asked himself. When they made no move in his
direction, he continued stealthily on to the north side of the building and, with a
bound, disappeared into the darkness.
