A Meeting in the Moonlight


       It was already past midnight when Musashi arrived at the small inn north
of Kitano where he had first met Jōtarō. The astonished innkeeper welcomed
him cordially and quickly prepared a place for him to sleep.
       Musashi went out early in the morning and returned late in the evening,
presenting the old man with a sack of Kurama sweet potatoes. He also showed
him a bolt of bleached Nara cotton, purchased at a nearby shop, and asked if he
could have it made up into an undershirt, a stomach wrapper and a loincloth.
       The innkeeper obligingly took the cloth to a neighborhood seamstress and
on his way back bought some sake. He made a stew with the sweet potatoes and
chatted with Musashi over the stew and sake until midnight, when the seamstress
came with the clothes. Musashi folded the clothing neatly and placed it beside
his pillow before retiring.
       The old man was awakened long before dawn by the sound of splashing
water. Looking out, he saw that Musashi had bathed with cold well water and
was standing in the moonlight wearing his new underwear and just putting on his
old kimono.
       Musashi, remarking that he was a little tired of Kyoto and had decided to
go to Edo, promised that when he came to Kyoto again, in three or four years, he
would stay at the inn.
       The innkeeper having tied his obi in the back for him, Musashi set off at a
fast pace. He took the narrow path through the fields to the Kitano highroad,
carefully picking his way through the piles of ox dung. The old man watched
sadly as the darkness swallowed him.
       Musashi's mind was as clear as the sky above him. Physically refreshed,
his body seemed to grow more buoyant with each step.
       "There's no reason to walk so fast," he said out loud, slackening his pace.
"I suppose this will be my last night in the realm of the living." This was neither
exclamation nor lament, merely a statement coming unbidden to his lips. He had
no sense as yet of actually staring death in the face.
       He had spent the previous day meditating under a pine tree at the inner
temple at Kurama, hoping to achieve that state of bliss in which body and soul
no longer matter. Unsuccessful in his effort to rid himself of the idea of death, he

was now ashamed of having wasted his time.
       The night air was invigorating. The sake, just the right amount, a short but
sound sleep, the bracing well water, new clothing—he did not feel like a man
about to die. He recalled the night in the dead of winter when he had forced
himself to the top of Eagle Mountain. Then, too, the stars had been dazzling, and
the trees had been festooned with icicles. The icicles would now have given way
to budding flowers.
       His head full of stray thoughts, he found it impossible to concentrate on
the vital problem facing him. What purpose, he wondered, would be served at
this stage by pondering questions that a century of thinking would not solve—
the meaning of death, the agony of dying, the life that would follow afterward?
       The district he was in was inhabited by noblemen and their retainers. He
heard the doleful sound of a flageolet, accompanied by the slow strains of a reed
mouth organ. In his mind's eye he saw mourners seated around a coffin, waiting
for the dawn. Had the dirge penetrated his ears before he actually became aware
of it? Perhaps it had aroused a subconscious memory of the dancing virgins of
Ise and his experience on Eagle Mountain. Doubt gnawed at his mind.
       As he paused to give the matter some thought, he noticed that he had
passed the Shōkokuji and was now only about a hundred yards from the silvery
Kamo River. In the light reflected on a dirt wall, he caught sight of a still, dark
figure. The man walked toward him, followed by a smaller shadow, a dog on a
leash. Satisfied by the presence of the animal that the man was not one of his
enemies, he relaxed and walked on by.
       The other man took a few steps, turned and said, "Can I trouble you, sir?"
"Me?"
       "Yes, if it's all right." His cap and hakama were of the sort worn by
artisans. "What is it?" asked Musashi.
      "Forgive me a peculiar question, but did you notice a house all lit up along
      this street?"
      "I wasn't paying much attention, but no, I don't think I did."
      "I guess I'm on the wrong street again."
      "What are you looking for?"
      "A house where there's just been a death."
      "I didn't see the house, but I heard a mouth organ and a flageolet about a
      hundred yards back."
      "That must be the place. The Shinto priest probably arrived before me and
      began the wake."

     "Are you attending the wake?"
      "Not exactly. I'm a coffin-maker from Toribe Hill. I was asked to go to the
Matsuo house, so I went to Yoshida Hill. They don't live there anymore." "The
Matsuo family on Yoshida Hill?"
     "Yes; I didn't know they'd moved. I went a long way for nothing. Thank
     you.
     "Wait," said Musashi. "Would that be Matsuo Kaname, who's in the service
     of Lord Konoe?"
     "That's right. He fell sick only about ten days before he died."
     Musashi turned and walked on; the coffin-maker hurried off in the opposite
     direction.
      "So my uncle's dead," thought Musashi matter-of-factly. He recalled how
his uncle had scraped and saved to accumulate a small sum of money. He
thought of the rice cakes he had received from his aunt and devoured on the
bank of the freezing river on New Year's morning. He wondered vacantly how
his aunt would get along now that she was all alone.
      He stood on the bank of the Upper Kamo and regarded the looming dark
panorama of the thirty-six hills of Higashiyama. Each peak seemed to stare back
at him with enmity. Then he ran down to a pontoon bridge. From the northern
part of the city, it was necessary to cross here to reach the road to Mount Hiei
and the pass leading to Omi Province.
      He was halfway across when he heard a voice, loud but indistinct. He
stopped and listened. The rapidly flowing water gurgled cheerfully, while a cold
wind swept through the valley. He couldn't locate the source of the cry and after
a few more steps paused again at the sound of the voice. Still unable to tell
where it came from, he hurried on to the other bank. As he left the bridge, he
spied a man with upraised arms running toward him from the north. The figure
seemed familiar.
      It was—Sasaki Kojirō, the ubiquitous fixer.
      As he approached, he greeted Musashi in an all too friendly way. After a
glance across the bridge, he asked, "Are you alone?"
     "Yes, of course."
     "I hope you will pardon me for the other night," said Kojirō. "Thank you for
     putting up with my interference."
     "I think it is I who should thank you," replied Musashi with equal
     politeness.
     "Are you on your way to the bout?"

      "Yes."
      "All alone?" Kojirō asked again.
      "Yes, of course."
      "Hmm. I wonder, Musashi, if you've misunderstood the sign we put up at
      Yanagimachi."
      "I don't think so."
       "You're fully aware of the conditions? This isn't to be a simple man-to-man
fight as it was in the case of Seijūrō and Denshichirō."
       "I know that."
       "Though the battle will be fought in the name of Genjirō, he'll be aided by
members of the Yoshioka School. Do you understand that 'members of the
Yoshioka School' could be ten men, or a hundred, even a thousand?"
       "Yes; why do you ask?"
       "Some of the weaker men have run away from the school, but the stronger
and more courageous have all gone up to the spreading pine. Right now they're
stationed all over the hillside, waiting for you."
       "Have you been to take a look?"
       "Urn. I decided I'd better come back and warn you. Knowing you'd cross
the pontoon bridge, I waited here. I consider this my duty, since I wrote the
sign." "That's very thoughtful of you."
      "Well, that's the situation. Are you really intending to go alone, or do you
      have supporters going by another route?"
      "I will have one companion."
      "Is that so? Where is he now?"
      "Right here!" Musashi, his laughing teeth shining in the moonlight, pointed
      to his shadow.
      Kojirō bristled. "This is no laughing matter."
      "I didn't mean it as a joke."
      "Oh? It sounded as though you were making fun of my advice."
       Musashi, assuming an attitude even graver than Kojirō's, countered, "Do
you think the great saint Shinran was joking when he said that any believer has
the strength of two, because the Buddha Amida walks with him?" Kojirō did not
answer.
       "From all appearances, it seems the Yoshiokas have the upper hand.
They're out in force. I'm alone. Without a doubt, you're assuming I'll be beaten.
But I beg you not to worry on my behalf. Supposing I knew they had ten men
and took ten men with me. What would happen? They'd throw in twenty men,

rather than ten. If I took twenty, they'd increase the number to thirty or forty, and
the battle would create an even greater public disturbance. Many people would
be killed or injured. The result would be a serious infringement against the
principles of government, with no compensating advancement for the cause of
swordsmanship. In other words, there'd be much to lose and little to gain by my
calling in assistance."
        "True as that may be, it's not in accordance with The Art of War to enter
into a battle you know you're going to lose."
        "There are times when it's necessary."
        "No! Not according to The Art of War. Abandoning yourself to rash action
is quite a different matter."
        "Whether or not my method is in accordance with The Art of War, I know
what's necessary for me."
       "You're breaking all the rules."
       Musashi laughed.
       "If you insist on going against the rules," argued Kojirō, "why don't you at
        least choose a line of action that will give you a chance to go on living?"
"The path I'm following is, for me, the way toward a fuller life." "You'll be lucky
if it doesn't lead you straight to hell!"
        "This river, you know, may be the three-pronged river of hell; this road,
the mile-long road to perdition; the hill I'll soon climb, the mountain of needles
on which the damned are impaled. Nevertheless, this is the only path toward true
life."
        "The way you talk, you may already be possessed by the god of death."
"Think what you like. There are people who die by remaining alive and others
who gain life by dying."
       "You poor devil!" said Kojirō, half in derision.
       "Tell me, Kojirō—if I follow this road, where will it take me?"
       "To Hananoki Village and then to the spreading pine at Ichijōji, where
       you've chosen to die."
       "How far is it?"
       "Only about two miles. You have plenty of time."
       "Thank you. I'll see you later," said Musashi breezily, as he turned and
       started down a side road.
       "That's not the way!"
       Musashi nodded.
       "That's the wrong way, I tell you."

     "I know."
      He went on down the slope. Beyond the trees on either side of the road
were tiered rice paddies, off in the distance a few thatched farmhouses. Kojirō
watched Musashi stop, look up at the moon and stand still for a time.
      Kojirō broke into laughter as it dawned on him that Musashi was urinating.
He himself looked up at the moon, thinking that before it had set, a lot of men
would be dead or dying.
      Musashi didn't come back. Kojirō sat down on the root of a tree and
contemplated the coming fight with a sentiment approaching glee. "To judge
from Musashi's calmness, he's already resigned to dying. Still, he'll put up a
tremendous struggle. The more of them he cuts down, the more fun it'll be to
watch. Ah, but the Yoshiokas have flying weapons. If he's hit by one of them, the
show will be over right then. That would spoil everything. I think I'd better tell
him about them."
      There was now a little mist and a predawn chill in the air.
      Standing up, Kojirō called, "Musashi, what's taking you so long?"
      A sense that something was off key sent a pang of anxiety through him. He
walked rapidly down the slope and called again. The only sound was the turning
of a waterwheel.
      "The silly bastard!"
      Racing back to the main road, he looked around in all directions, seeing
only the temple roofs and forests of Shirakawa, rising on the slopes of
Higashiyama, and the moon. Jumping to the conclusion that Musashi had run
away, he rebuked himself for not seeing through his calmness and took off at a
flying pace for Ichijōji.
      Grinning, Musashi emerged from behind a tree and stood where Kojirō
had been standing. He was glad to be rid of him. He had no use for a man who
took pleasure in watching other people die, who watched impassively while
other men staked their lives on causes that were important to them. Kojirō was
no innocent spectator, motivated only by the desire to learn. He was a deceitful,
scheming interloper, always out to ingratiate himself with both sides, always
presenting himself as the splendid chap who wants to help everybody.
      Perhaps Kojirō had thought that if he told Musashi how strong the enemy
was, Musashi would get down on his hands and knees and ask him to serve as
his second. And, conceivably, if Musashi's first objective had been to preserve
his own life, he would have welcomed assistance. But even before meeting
Kojirō, he had picked up enough information to know he might have to face a

hundred men.
       It wasn't that he had forgotten the lesson Takuan had taught him: the truly
brave man is one who loves life, cherishing it as a treasure that once forfeited
can never be recovered. He well knew that to live was more than merely to
survive. The problem was how to imbue his life with meaning, how to ensure
that his life would cast a bright ray of light into the future, even if it became
necessary to give up that life for a cause. If he succeeded in doing this, the length
of his life—twenty years or seventy—made little difference. A lifetime was only
an insignificant interval in the endless flow of time.
       To Musashi's way of thinking, there was one way of life for ordinary
people, another for the warrior. It was vitally important for him to live like a
samurai and to die like one. There was no turning back from the path he had
chosen. Even if he was hacked to pieces, the enemy could not obliterate the fact
of his having responded fearlessly and honestly to the challenge.
       He gave his attention to the routes available. The shortest, as well as the
widest and easiest to travel, was the road Kojirō had taken. Another, not quite so
direct, was a path leading along the Takano River, a tributary of the Kamo, to the
Ohara highroad and then by way of the Shugakuin imperial villa to Ichijōji. The
third route went east for a short distance, then north as far as the foothills of
Uryū and finally across a path into the village.
       The three roads met at the spreading pine; the difference in distance was
insignificant. Yet from the viewpoint of a small force attacking a much larger
one, the approach was all-important. The choice itself could decide victory or
defeat.
       Instead of weighing the problem at some length, after only a momentary
pause he started running in a direction almost opposite from that of Ichijōji. First
he crossed over the foot of Kagura Hill to a point behind the tomb of the
Emperor Go-Ichijō. Then, passing through a thick bamboo grove, he came to a
mountain stream flowing through a village in the northwest. Looming above him
was the north shoulder of Mount Daimonji. Silently he began climbing.
       Through the trees on his right he could see a garden wall, apparently
belonging to the Ginkakuji. Almost directly beneath him, the jujube-shaped pond
in the garden shone like a mirror. As he went farther up, the pond was lost in the
trees, and the rippling Kamo River came into view. He felt as though he held the
whole city in the palm of his hand.
       He stopped for a moment to check his position. By proceeding horizontally
across the sides of four hills, he could reach a point above and behind the

spreading pine, where he could command a bird's-eye view of the enemy's
position. Like Oda Nobunaga at the Battle of Okehazama, he had spurned the
usual routes in favor of a difficult detour.
       "Who goes there?"
       Musashi froze and waited. Footsteps approached cautiously. Seeing a man
dressed like a samurai in the service of a court noble, Musashi decided he was
not a member of the Yoshioka forces.
       The man's nose was smudged from the smoke of his torch; his kimono was
damp and mud-spattered. He uttered a little cry of surprise.
     Musashi stared at him suspiciously.
     "Aren't you Miyamoto Musashi?" the man asked with a low bow, his eyes
     tinged with fright.
     Musashi's eyes brightened in the light of the torch.
       "Are you Miyamoto Musashi?" Terrified, the samurai seemed to wobble
slightly on his feet. The fierceness in Musashi's eyes was something not often
encountered in human beings.
     "Who are you?" Musashi asked crisply.
     "Er, I...I..."
     "Stop stammering. Who are you?"
     "I'm ... I'm from the house of Lord Karasumaru Mitsuhiro."
     "I'm Miyamoto Musashi, but what's a retainer of Lord Karasumaru's doing
     up here in the middle of the night?"
       "Then you are Musashi!" He sighed with relief. The next instant, he was
running at breakneck speed down the mountain, his torch trailing light behind
him. Musashi turned and continued on his way across the mountainside.
     When the samurai reached the vicinity of the Ginkakuji, he shouted, "Kura,
     where are you?"
     "We're here. Where are you?" It wasn't the voice of Kura, another retainer
     of Karasumaru, but that of Jōtarō.
     "Jō-ta-rō! Is that you?"
     "Y-e-e-s!"
     "Come up here fast!"
     "I can't. Otsū can't walk any farther."
       The samurai swore under his breath, raised his voice even higher and
shouted, "Come quick! I found Musashi! Mu-sa-shi! If you don't hurry, we'll lose
him!"
       Jōtarō and Otsū were about two hundred yards farther down the path; it

took a while for their two long shadows, seemingly linked together, to hobble up
to the samurai. He waved his torch to hurry them on, and in a matter of seconds
could hear for himself Otsū's labored breathing. Her face looked whiter than the
moon; the travel paraphernalia on her thin arms and legs seemed cruel and
absurd. But when the light fell full upon her, her cheeks took on a ruddy hue.
       "Is it true?" she panted.
       "Yes, I just saw him." Then, in a more urgent tone: "If you hurry, you
should be able to catch him. But if you waste time—"
       "Which way?" asked Jōtarō, exasperated at being caught between an
agitated man and an ailing woman.
       Otsū's physical condition had by no means improved, but once Jōtarō had
divulged the news of Musashi's impending battle, there was no way of keeping
her in bed, even if that might prolong her life. Disregarding all entreaties, she
had tied up her hair, laced on her straw sandals and all but staggered out of Lord
Karasumaru's gate. Once the impossibility of stopping her had become apparent,
Lord Karasumaru did all he could to help. He took charge of the operation
himself, and while she was limping slowly toward the Ginkakuji, sent his men to
scour the various approaches to Ichijōji Village. The men walked until their feet
ached and had been on the verge of giving up when the quarry was found.
       The samurai pointed, and Otsū started resolutely up the hill.
       Jōtarō, fearing she might collapse, asked at every other step, "Are you all
right? Can you make it?"
       She did not reply. Truth to tell, she did not even hear him. Her emaciated
body was responsive only to the need to reach Musashi. Though her mouth was
parched, cold sweat poured from her ashen forehead.
       "This must be the way," said Jōtarō, hoping to encourage her. "This road
goes to Mount Hiei. It's all flat from now on. No more climbing. Do you want to
rest for a moment?"
       Silently she shook her head, clinging firmly to the stick they were carrying
between them, struggling for breath as though all life's difficulties were
compressed into this one journey.
       When they'd managed to cover nearly a mile, Jōtarō shouted, "Musashi!
Sensei!" and went on shouting.
       His strong voice bolstered Otsū's courage, but before long her strength was
gone. "Jō-Jōtarō," she whispered weakly. She let go of the stick and sank into the
grass by the road. Face to the ground, she clasped her delicate fingers over her
mouth. Her shoulders jerked convulsively.

       "Otsū! It's blood! You're spitting up blood! Oh, Otsū!" On the brink of
tears, he clasped his arms around her waist and held her up. She shook her head
slowly from side to side. Not knowing what else to do, Jōtarō patted her gently
on the back. "What do you want?" he asked.
      She was beyond replying.
      "I know! Water! Is that it?"
      She nodded feebly.
      "Wait here. I'll get some."
       He stood up and looked around, listened for a moment and went to a
nearby ravine, where he heard water running. With little difficulty, he found a
spring bubbling forth from the rocks. As he started to scoop up some water with
his hands, he hesitated, eyes fixed on the tiny crabs at the bottom of the pristine
pool. The moon wasn't shining directly on the water, but the reflection of the sky
was more beautiful than the silver-white clouds themselves. Deciding to take a
sip himself before carrying out his task, he moved a few feet to one side and bent
down on his hands and knees, craning his neck like a duck.
       Then he gasped—apparition?—and his body bristled like a chestnut in its
burr. Reflected in the small pool was a striped pattern, half a dozen trees on the
other side. Right beside them was the image of Musashi.
       Jōtarō thought his imagination was playing tricks on him, that the
reflection would soon dissolve. When it failed to go away, he raised his eyes
very slowly.
       "You're here!" he cried. "You're really here!" The peaceful reflection of the
sky turned to mud as he splashed across to the other side, wetting his kimono to
the shoulders.
       "You're here!" He threw his arms around Musashi's legs.
       "Quiet," said Musashi softly. "It's dangerous here. Come back later." "No!
I've found you. I'm staying with you."
      "Quiet. I heard your voice. I've been waiting here. Now take Otsū some
      water."
      "It's muddy now."
      "There's another brook over there. See? Here, take this with you." He held
      out a bamboo tube.
      Jōtarō raised his face and said, "No! You take it to her."
       They stood like that for a few seconds, then Musashi nodded and went to
the other brook. Having filled the tube, he carried it to Otsū's side. He put his
arm around her gently and held the tube to her mouth.

       Jōtarō stood beside them. "Look, Otsū! It's Musashi. Don't you
understand? Musashi!"
       As Otsū sipped the cool water, her breath came a little more easily, though
she remained limp in Musashi's arm. Her eyes seemed to be focused on
something very far away.
       "Don't you see, Otsū? Not me, Musashi! It's Musashi's arm around you,
not mine."
       Burning tears gathered in her vacant eyes until they looked like glass. Two
streams sparkled down her cheeks. She nodded.
       Jōtarō was beside himself with joy. "You're happy now, aren't you? This is
what you wanted, isn't it?" Then, to Musashi: "She's been saying, over and over,
that whatever happened, she had to see you. She wouldn't listen to anybody!
Please tell her, if she keeps on acting like this, she'll die. She won't pay any
attention to me. Maybe she'll do what you tell her."
       "It was all my fault," said Musashi. "I'll apologize and tell her to take
better care of herself. Jōtarō . . ."
     "Yes?"
     "Would you leave us alone, just for a little while?"
     "Why? Why can't I stay here?"
     "Don't be that way, Jōtarō," Otsū said pleadingly. "Just for a few minutes.
     Please."
       "Oh, all right." He couldn't refuse Otsū, even if he didn't understand. "I'll
be up the hill. Call me when you're through."
       Otsū's natural shyness was magnified by her illness, and she could not
decide what to say.
       Musashi, embarrassed, turned his face away from her. With her back to
him, she stared at the ground. He gazed up at the sky.
       He feared instinctively that no words existed to tell her what was in his
heart. All that had happened since the night she had freed him from the
cryptomeria tree passed through his mind, and he recognized the purity of the
love that had kept her searching for him these five long years.
       Who was stronger, who had suffered more? Otsū, her life difficult and
complex, burning with a love she could not conceal? Or he himself, hiding his
feelings behind a stony face, burying the embers of his passion under a layer of
cold ashes? Musashi had thought before, and thought now, that his way was the
more painful. Yet there was strength and valor in Otsū's constancy. The burden
she had borne was too heavy for most men to bear alone.

      "Only a short time to go," thought Musashi.
      The moon was low in the sky, the light whiter now. Dawn was not far
away. Soon both the moon and he himself would fade behind the mountain of
death. He must, in the short time remaining, tell Otsū the truth. He owed her that
much, for her devotion and her faithfulness. But the words would not come. The
harder he tried to speak, the more tongue-tied he became. He watched the sky
helplessly, as though inspiration might descend from it.
      Otsū stared at the ground and wept. Within her heart was a flaming love, a
love so strong that it had driven everything else out. Principles, religion, concern
for her own welfare, pride—all paled beside this one consuming passion. In
some way, she believed, this love simply had to overcome Musashi's resistance.
Somehow, through her tears, a way must be found for them to live together, apart
from the world of ordinary people. But now that she was with him, she was
helpless. She could not bring herself to describe the pain of being away from
him, the misery of traveling through life alone, the agony she suffered over his
lack of feeling. If only she had a mother to whom she could pour out all her
sorrows .. .
      The long silence was broken by the honking of a flock of geese. Attuned to
the approach of dawn, they rose above the trees and flew off over the
mountaintops.
      "The geese are flying north," said Musashi, conscious of the irrelevance.
"Musashi . . ."
      Their eyes met in a shared memory of the years in the village, when the
geese had passed high above each spring and fall.
      Everything had been so simple then. She had been friendly with
Matahachi. Musashi she had disliked because of his roughness, but she had
never been afraid to talk back to him when he said insulting things to her. Each
now thought of the mountain where the Shippōji stood and the banks of the
Yoshino River below. And both knew they were squandering precious moments
—moments that would never return.
     "Jōtarō said you were ill. Is it very bad?"
     "It's nothing serious."
     "Are you feeling better now?"
     "Yes, but it's of no importance. Are you really expecting to be killed
     today?" "I'm afraid so."
     "If you die, I can't go on living. Perhaps that's why it's so easy to forget
     about my sickness now."

       A certain light came into her eyes, and it made him feel the weakness of
his own determination as compared to hers. To acquire even a degree of self-
control, he had had to ponder the question of life and death for many years,
discipline himself at every turn of the road, force himself to undergo the rigors of
a samurai's training. With no training or conscious self-discipline, this woman
was able to say without the slightest hesitation that she, too, was prepared to die
if he did. Her face expressed perfect serenity, her eyes telling him she was
neither lying nor speaking impulsively. She seemed almost happy over the
prospect of following him in death. He wondered, with a tinge of shame, how
women could be so strong.
       "Don't be a fool, Otsū!" he suddenly blurted. "There's no reason why you
should die." The strength of his own voice and the depth of his feeling surprised
even him. "It's one thing for me to die fighting against the Yoshiokas. Not only is
it right for a man who lives by the sword to die by the sword; I have a duty to
remind those cowards of the Way of the Samurai. Your willingness to follow me
in death is deeply touching, but what good would it do? No more than the pitiful
death of an insect."
       Seeing her burst into tears again, he regretted the brutality of his words.
       "Now I understand how over the years I've lied to you, and I've lied to
myself. I didn't intend to deceive you when we ran away from the village or
when I saw you at Hanada Bridge, but I did—by pretending to be cold and
indifferent. That wasn't the way I really felt.
       "In a little while, I'll be dead. What I'm about to say is the truth. I love you,
Otsū. I'd throw everything to the four winds and live out my life with you, if
only ..."
       After a moment's pause, he continued in a more forceful vein. "You must
believe every word I say, because I'll never have another chance to tell you this. I
speak with neither pride nor pretense. There have been days when I couldn't
concentrate for thinking about you, nights I couldn't sleep for dreaming of you.
Hot, passionate dreams, Otsū, dreams that nearly drove me mad. Often I've
hugged my pallet, pretending it was you.
       "But even when I felt like that, if I took out my sword and looked at it, the
madness evaporated and my blood cooled."
       Her face turned toward him, tearful but as radiant as a morning glory, she
started to speak. Seeing the fervor in his eyes, her words caught in her throat and
she looked at the ground again.
       "The sword is my refuge. Any time my passion threatens to overcome me,

I force myself back into the world of swordsmanship. This is my fate, Otsū. I'm
torn between love and self-discipline. I seem to be traveling on two paths at
once. Yet when the paths diverge, I invariably manage to keep myself on the
right one.
       "I know myself better than anyone else does. I'm neither a genius nor a
great man."
       He became silent again. Despite his desire to express his feelings honestly,
his words seemed to him to be concealing the truth. His heart told him to be even
more candid.
       "That's the kind of man I am. What else can I say? I think of my sword,
and you disappear into some dark corner of my mind—no, disappear altogether,
leaving no trace. At times like that I'm happiest and most satisfied with my life.
Do you understand? All this time you've suffered, you've risked body and soul
on a man who loves his sword more than he loves you. I'll die to vindicate my
sword, but I wouldn't die for the love of a woman. Not even you. As much as I'd
like to fall on my knees and beg your forgiveness, I can't."
       He felt her sensitive fingers tighten on his wrist. She was no longer crying.
"I know all that," she said emphatically. "If I didn't know it, I wouldn't love you
as I do."
       "But can't you see the foolishness of dying on my account? For this one
moment, I'm yours, body and soul. But once I've left you ... You mustn't die for
the love of a man like me. There's a good way, a proper way, for a woman to
live, Otsū. You must search for it, make a happy life for yourself. These must be
my parting words. It's time for me to go."
       Gently he removed her hand from his wrist and stood up. She caught his
sleeve and cried, "Musashi, just one minute more!"
       There were so many things she wanted to tell him: she did not care if he
forgot her when he was not with her, she did not mind being called insignificant,
she'd had no delusions about his character when she fell in love with him. She
caught his sleeve again, her eyes searching his, trying to prolong this last
moment, to keep it from ever ending.
       Her silent appeal nearly undid him. There was beauty even in the
weakness that prevented her from speaking. Overcome by his own weakness and
fear, he felt himself to be a tree with brittle roots, menaced by a raging wind. He
wondered if his chaste devotion to the Way of the Sword would crumble, like a
landslide, under the weight of her tears.
       To break the silence, he asked, "Do you understand?"

       "Yes," she said weakly. "I understand perfectly, but if you die, I'll die too.
My dying will have a meaning to me, just as yours has to you. If you can face
the end calmly, so can I. I won't be trampled down like an insect, or drown in a
moment of grief. I have to decide for myself. Nobody else can do it for me, not
even you."
       With great strength and perfect calm, she went on. "If in your heart you'll
consider me to be your bride, that's enough, a joy and a blessing that only I, of
all the women in the world, possess. You said you didn't want to make me
unhappy. I can assure you I won't die because of unhappiness. There are people
who seem to consider me unfortunate, yet I don't feel that way in the least. I look
forward with pleasure to the day when I die. It will be like a glorious morning
when the birds are singing. I'll go as happily as I would to my wedding."
       Nearly out of breath, she folded her arms over her breast and gazed up
contentedly, as though captivated by a delightful dream.
       The moon seemed to be sinking rapidly. Though it was still not daybreak,
mist had begun to rise through the trees.
       The silence was shattered by a horrifying scream that rent the air like the
screech of a mythical bird. It came from the cliff Jōtarō had climbed earlier.
Startled out of her dreams, Otsū directed her eyes to the top of the cliff.
       Musashi chose this moment to leave. Without a word, he simply withdrew
from her side and walked away, toward his appointment with death.
       Otsū, with a stifled cry, ran a few steps after him.
       Musashi ran farther ahead, then turned back and said, "I understand your
feelings, Otsū, but please don't die a cowardly death. Don't, because of your
sorrow, allow yourself to sink into the valley of death and succumb like a
weakling. Get well first, then think about it. I'm not throwing my life away for a
useless cause. I've chosen to do what I'm doing because by dying I can achieve
eternal life. Depend on one thing: my body may turn to dust, but I'll still be
alive."
       Catching his breath, he added a warning. "Are you listening? By
attempting to follow me in death, you may find that you're dying alone. You may
look for me in the world beyond only to find I'm not there. I intend to live on for
a hundred or a thousand years—in the hearts of my countrymen, in the spirit of
Japanese swordsmanship."
       He was out of hearing before she could speak again. She felt her very soul
had left her, but she did not think of this as a parting. It was more as though the
two of them were being engulfed in a great wave of life and death.

      A cascade of dirt and pebbles came to rest at the foot of the cliff, followed
closely by Jōtarō, wearing the grotesque mask he had received from the widow
in Nara.
      Throwing his hands up, he said, "I've never been so surprised in my life!"
"What happened?" whispered Otsū, not quite recovered from the shock of seeing
the mask.
      "Didn't you hear it? I don't know why, but all of a sudden there was this
horrible scream."
      "Where were you? Were you wearing that mask?"
      "I was above the cliff. There's a path up there about as wide as this one.
After I climbed up a little way, I found a nice big rock, so I was just sitting there
looking at the moon."
      "The mask—did you have it on?"
      "Yes. I could hear foxes howling, and maybe badgers or something rustling
around near me. I thought the mask would scare them away. Then I heard this
shriek, bloodcurdling, like it was coming from a ghost in hell!"
