A Drink of Milk


        The road descending along a ridge from Mount Hiei came out in Ōmi
Province, at a point just beyond the Miidera.
        Musashi was leading the cow by a rope. Looking over his shoulder, he said
gently, "If you want, we can stop and rest. It's not as though either of us is in a
hurry." But at least, he thought, they were on their way. Osugi, unused to cows,
had at first flatly refused to get on the animal. It had taken all his ingenuity to
persuade her, the argument that worked being that she could not remain
indefinitely in a priestly bastion of celibacy.
        Face down on the cow's neck, Osugi groaned painfully and readjusted
herself. At every sign of solicitude on Musashi's part, she reminded herself of
her hatred, silently conveying her contempt at being cared for by her mortal
enemy.
        Though he was well aware that she lived for no other reason than to take
revenge on him, he found himself unable to regard her as a genuine foe. No one,
not even enemies much stronger than she was, had ever caused him so much
trouble or embarrassment. Her trickery had brought him to the brink of disaster
in his own village; because of her he had been jeered and reviled at
Kiyomizudera; time and again she had tripped him up and thwarted his plans.
There had been times, such as the previous night, when he had cursed her and
very nearly given in to the urge to slice her in two.
        Still, he could not bring himself to lay a hand on her, especially now, when
she was ailing and bereft of her customary verve. Oddly, the inactivity of her
vicious tongue depressed him, and he longed to see her restored to health, even if
this meant more trouble for him.
        "Riding that way must be pretty uncomfortable," he said. "Try to bear up a
little longer. When we get to Ōtsu, I'll think of something."
        The view to the northeast was magnificent. Lake Biwa was spread out
placidly below them, Mount Ibuki was just beyond, and the peaks of Echizen
rose in the distance. On the near side of the lake, Musashi could make out each
of the famous Eight Views of Karasaki in the village of Seta.
        "Let's stop for a while," he said. "You'll feel better if you get off and lie
down for a few minutes." Tying the animal to a tree, he put his arms around her

and lifted her down.
      Face down on the ground, Osugi pushed his hands away and let out a
groan. Her face was feverishly hot and her hair was a mess.
      "Don't you want some water?" Musashi asked, not for the first time,
rubbing her on the back. "You should eat something too." She shook her head
stubbornly. "You haven't drunk a drop of water since last night," he said
pleadingly. "If you keep this up, you'll just make yourself worse. I'd like to get
some medicine for you, but there aren't any houses around here. Look, why don't
you eat half of my lunch?"
      "How disgusting!"
      "Huh?"
      "I'd rather die in some field and get eaten by the birds. I'd never sink so
low as to accept food from an enemy!" She shook his hand off her back and
clutched at the grass.
      Wondering if she would ever get over her basic misunderstanding, he
treated her as tenderly as he would his own mother, patiently trying to soothe her
each time she lashed out at him.
      "Now, Granny, you know you don't want to die. You've got to live. Don't
you want to see Matahachi make something of himself?"
      She bared her teeth and snarled, "What's that got to do with you?
Matahachi'll get ahead one of these days without your help, thank you."
      "I'm sure he will. But you must get well so that you yourself can encourage
him.
      "You hypocrite!" the old woman screamed. "You're wasting your time if
you think you can flatter me into forgetting how much I hate you."
      Realizing that anything he said would be taken the wrong way, Musashi
stood up and walked away. He chose a spot behind a rock and began eating his
lunch of rice balls stuffed with a dark, sweetish bean paste and individually
wrapped in oak leaves. Half of them he left uneaten.
      Hearing voices, he looked around the rock and saw a country woman
talking with Osugi. She was dressed in the hakama worn by the women of
Ohara, and her hair hung down around her shoulders. In stentorian tones, she
was saying, "I've got this sick person at my place. She's better now, but she'd
recover even quicker if I could give her some milk. May I milk the cow?"
      Osugi lifted her face and looked at the woman inquiringly. "We don't have
many cows where I come from. Can you actually get milk from her?"
      The two exchanged a few more words as the woman squatted down and

began squirting milk into a sake jar. When it was full, she stood up, clutching it
tightly in her arms, and said, "Thanks. I'll be going now."
        "Wait!" cried Osugi in a raspy voice. She stretched out her arms and
glanced around to make sure Musashi was not watching. "Give me some milk
first. Just a sip or two will be enough."
        The woman watched, astonished, as Osugi put the jar to her lips, closed
her eyes and gulped greedily, dribbling milk down her chin.
        When she was through, Osugi shuddered, then grimaced as though she
might vomit. "What a nasty taste!" she whined. "But maybe it'll make me better.
It's awful, though; viler than medicine."
        "Is something the matter? Are you sick?"
        "Nothing serious. Cold and a little fever." She stood up briskly, as though
all her ailments had dropped away, and after again reassuring herself that
Musashi wasn't looking, drew closer to the woman and asked in a low voice, "If
I go straight down this road, where will it take me?"
       "Just above the Miidera."
       "That's in Ōtsu, isn't it? Is there a back way I could take?"
       "Well, yes, but where do you want to go?"
       "I don't care. I just want to get away from that villain!"
        "About eight or nine hundred yards down this road, there's a path going off
to the north. If you keep on that, you'll end up between Sakamoto and Ōtsu."
        "If you meet a man looking for me," Osugi said furtively, "don't tell him
you saw me." She bumbled off, like a lame praying mantis in a hurry, brushing
clumsily past the woman.
        Musashi chuckled and came out from behind his rock. "I suppose you live
around here," he said amicably. "Your husband, he's a farmer, woodcutter,
something like that?"
        The woman cowered, but answered, "Oh, no. I'm from the inn at the top of
1 the pass."

        "So much the better. If I gave you some money, would you run an errand
for me?"
        "I'd be glad to, but you see, there's this sick person at the inn."
        "I could take the milk back for you and wait for you there. How would that
be? If you go now, you should be back before dark."
        "In that case, I guess I could go, but—"
        "Nothing to worry about! I'm not the villain the old woman said I am. I
was only trying to help her. If she can get about on her own, there's no reason for

me to worry about her. Now I'll just write a note. I want you to take it to the
house of Lord Karasumaru Mitsuhiro. That's in the north part of the city."
        With the brush from his writing kit, he quickly scribbled the words he had
been longing to write to Otsū during his recuperation at the Mudōji. Having
entrusted his letter to the woman, he mounted the cow and lumbered off,
repeating the words he had written and speculating on how Otsū would feel
when she read them. "And I thought I'd never see her again," he mumbled,
suddenly coming to life.
        "Considering how weak she was," he mused, "she may be sick in bed
again. But when she receives my letter, she'll get up and come as fast as she can.
Jōtarō too."
        He allowed the cow to proceed at her own pace, stopping from time to
time to let her nibble grass. His letter to Otsū was simple, but he was rather
pleased with it: "At Hanada Bridge, it was you who waited. This time, let it be
me. I've gone on ahead. I'll wait for you in Ōtsu, at Kara Bridge in the village of
Seta. When we're together again, we'll talk of many things." He had tried to give
the matter-of-fact message a poetic cast. He recited it again to himself,
pondering the "many things" they had to discuss.
        When he reached the inn, he got off the cow and, holding the jar of milk in
both hands, called, "Anybody here?"
        As was usual in roadside establishments of this sort, there was an open
area under the front eaves for travelers who stopped to have tea or a light meal.
Inside was a tea room, a section of which formed the kitchen. Rooms for guests
were in the rear. An old woman was putting wood into an earthen oven, on top of
which was a wooden steamer.
        As he took a seat on a bench out front, she came and poured him a cup of
lukewarm tea. He then explained himself and handed her the jar.
        "What's this?" she asked, eyeing him dubiously.
        Thinking that perhaps she was deaf, he slowly repeated what he had said.
        "Milk, you say? Milk? What for?" Still puzzled, she turned toward the
interior and called, "Sir, can you come out here a minute? I don't know what this
is all about."
        "What?" A man ambled around the corner of the inn and asked, "What's
the trouble, ma'am?"
        She thrust the jar into his hands, but he neither looked at it nor heard what
she was saying. His eyes were glued on Musashi, his face a study in disbelief.
Musashi, equally astounded, cried, "Matahachi!"

       "Takezō!"
       The two rushed at each other, stopping just before they collided. When
Musashi held out his arms, Matahachi did the same thing, letting go of the jar.
"How many years?"
      "Not since Sekigahara."
      "That makes it ... "
      "Five years. It must be. I'm twenty-two now."
       As they hugged each other, the sweet odor of the milk from the broken jar
enveloped them, evoking the time when they had both been babes in arms.
       "You've become very famous, Takezō. But I guess I shouldn't be calling
you Takezō. I'll call you Musashi, like everyone else. I've heard many stories
about your success at the spreading pine—and about some things you did before
that too."
       "Don't embarrass me. I'm still an amateur. But the world's full of people
who don't seem to be as good as I am. Say, are you staying here?"
      "Yes, I've been here about ten days. I left Kyoto with the idea of going to
      Edo, but something came up."
      "I'm told somebody's sick. Oh, well, can't do anything about it now, but
      that's why I brought the milk."
      "Sick? Oh, yeah ... my traveling companion."
       "That's too bad. Anyway, it's good to see you. The last I heard from you
was the letter Jōtarō brought when I was on my way to Nara."
       Matahachi hung his head, hoping Musashi wouldn't mention the boastful
predictions he'd made at the time.
       Musashi put his hand on Matahachi's shoulder, thinking how good it was
to see him again and how he'd like to have a good long talk.
      "Who's traveling with you?" he asked innocently.
      "Oh, it's nobody, nobody you'd be interested in. It's just—"
      "It doesn't matter. Let's go somewhere where we can talk."
      As they walked away from the inn, Musashi asked, "What are you doing for
      a living?"
      "Work, you mean?"
      "Yes."
       "I don't have any special talents or skills, so it's hard to get a position with
a daimyō. I guess I can't say I do anything in particular."
       "You mean you've been loafing all these years?" asked Musashi, vaguely
suspecting the truth.

       "Stop it. Saying things like that brings back all sorts of unpleasant
memories." His mind seemed to drift back to those days in the shadow of Mount
Ibuki. "Where I made my great mistake was in taking up with Okō."
       "Let's sit down," said Musashi, crossing his legs and dropping to the grass.
He felt a twinge of exasperation. Why did Matahachi persist in considering
himself inferior? And why did he attribute his troubles to others? "You blame
everything on Okō," he said firmly, "but is that any way for a full-grown man to
talk? Nobody can create a worthwhile life for you but you yourself."
       "I admit I was wrong, but ... how can I put it? I just don't seem able to alter
n y fate."
       "In times like these, you'll never get anywhere thinking that way. Go to
Edo if you want, but when you get there, you're going to find people from all
over the country, everyone hungry for money and position. You won't make a
name for yourself just doing what the next man does. You'll have to distinguish
yourself in some way."
       "I should have taken up swordsmanship when I was young."
       "Now that you mention it, I wonder if you're cut out to be a swordsman.
Anyway, you're just starting out. Maybe you should think of becoming a scholar.
I suspect that'd be the best way for you to find a position with a daimyō."
       "Don't worry. I'll do something." Matahachi broke off a blade of grass and
put it between his teeth. His shame weighed him down. It was mortifying to
realize what five years of idleness had done. He'd been able to brush off stories
he'd heard about Musashi with comparative ease; confronting him in the flesh
like this drove home the contrast between them. In Musashi's overpowering
presence, Matahachi had trouble remembering they had once been the best of
friends. Even the man's dignity was somehow oppressive. Neither envy nor his
competitive urge could save him from the painful awareness of his own
inadequacy.
       "Cheer up!" said Musashi. But even as he slapped Matahachi on the
shoulder, he sensed the man's weakness. "What's done is done. Forget about the
past," he urged. "If you killed five years, so what? All it means is you're starting
out five years later. Those five years may in their own way hold a valuable
lesson."
      "They were lousy."
      "Oh, I forgot! I just left your mother a little while ago."
      "You saw my mother?"
       "Yes. I must say, I can't understand why you weren't born with more of her

strength and tenacity." Nor, he thought to himself, could he understand why
Osugi had a son like this, so shiftless and full of self-pity. He felt like shaking
him and reminding him how lucky he was to have a mother at all. Staring at
Matahachi, he asked himself how Osugi's wrath could be assuaged. The answer
came immediately: if Matahachi would only make something of himself . . .
       "Matahachi," he said solemnly. "Why, when you have a mother like yours,
don't you try to do something to make her happy? Having no parents, I can't help
feeling you're not as grateful as you ought to be. It's not that you don't show her
enough respect. But somehow, even though you're blessed with the best thing a
person can have, you seem to think no more of it than of so much dirt. If I had a
mother like yours, I'd be much more eager to improve myself and do something
really worthwhile simply because there'd be someone to share my happiness.
Nobody rejoices over a person's accomplishments as much as his parents.
       "Maybe it sounds like I'm just spouting moral platitudes. But from a
vagabond like me, it's not that. I can't begin to tell you how lonely I feel when I
come across a beautiful view, then suddenly realize there's no one to enjoy it
with me."
       Musashi paused to catch his breath and took hold of his friend's hand.
"You yourself know what I'm saying is true. You know I'm speaking as an old
friend, a man from the same village. Let's try to recapture the spirit we had when
we went off to Sekigahara. There are no more wars now, but the struggle to
survive in a peaceful world is no less difficult. You have to fight; you have to
have a plan. If you'd give it a try, I'd do anything I could to help."
       Matahachi's tears dropped onto their clutched hands. Despite the
resemblance of Musashi's words to one of his mother's tiresome sermons, he was
deeply moved by his friend's concern.
       "You're right," he said, wiping away his tears. "Thanks. I'll do what you
say. I'll become a new man, right now. I agree, I'm not the type to succeed as a
swordsman. I'll go to Edo and find a teacher. Then I'll study hard. I swear I will."
       "I'll keep my eyes open for a good teacher, as well as a good master you
might work for. You could even work and study at the same time."
      "It'll be like starting life over again. But there's something else that bothers
      me."
      "Well? As I said, I'll do anything I can to help. That's the least I can do to
      make up for making your mother so angry."
      "It's sort of embarrassing. You see, my companion is a woman.... Not just
      any woman. It's—oh, I can't say it."

      "Come on, act like a man!"
      "Don't get angry. It's somebody you know."
      "Who?"
      "Akemi."
      Startled, Musashi thought: "Could he have picked anybody worse?" but he
      caught himself before saying it out loud.
       True, Akemi was not as sexually depraved as her mother, not yet at least,
but she was well on her way—a bird on the wing with a destructive torch in its
mouth. Besides the incident with Seijūrō, Musashi strongly suspected there had
been something going on between her and Kojirō. He wondered what perverse
fate led Matahachi to women like Okō and her daughter.
       Matahachi misinterpreted Musashi's silence as a sign of jealousy. "Are you
angry? I told you honestly, because I didn't think I should hide it."
       "You simpleton, it's you I'm worried about. Have you been cursed since
birth, or do you go out of your way to find bad luck? I thought you'd learned
your lesson from Okō."
       In reply to Musashi's questions, Matahachi told him how he and Akemi
happened to be together. "Maybe I'm being punished for deserting Mother," he
concluded. "Akemi hurt her leg when she fell into the ravine, and it began to get
worse, so—"
       "Oh, here you are, sir!" said the old woman from the inn in the local
dialect. Vague and senile, she put her arms behind her back and looked up at the
sky, as though checking on the weather. "The sick woman isn't with you," she
added, her flat inflection leaving it unclear as to whether she was asking or
telling.
      Flushing slightly, Matahachi said, "Akemi? Has something happened to
      her?"
      "She's not in bed."
      "Are you sure?"
      "She was there a while ago, but she isn't now."
      Though a sixth sense told Musashi what had happened, he merely said,
      "We'd better go see."
      Akemi's bedding was still spread out on the floor, but otherwise the room
      was bare.
       Matahachi cursed and made a futile circuit of the room. Face burning with
rage, he said, "No obi, no money! Not so much as a comb or hairpin! She's
crazy! What's wrong with her—deserting me like this!"

       The old woman was standing in the doorway. "Terrible thing to do," she
said, as if to herself. "That girl—maybe I shouldn't say it—but she wasn't sick.
Putting on, she was, so she could stay in bed. I may be old, but I can see through
things like that."
       Matahachi ran out and stood staring down the white road curving along the
ridge. The cow, lying under a peach tree whose blossoms had already darkened
and fallen, broke the silence with a long, sleepy-sounding moo.
       "Matahachi," said Musashi, "why stand there moping? Let's pray she finds
a place where she can settle down and lead a peaceful life, and let it go at that."
       A single yellow butterfly was tossed high in the swirling breeze before
plummeting over the edge of a cliff.
       "Your promise made me very happy," said Musashi. "Now, isn't it time to
do something about it, really try and make something of yourself?"
       "Yes, I. have to, don't I?" mumbled Matahachi without enthusiasm, biting
his lower lip to keep it from trembling.
       Musashi swung him around, diverting his eyes from the deserted road.
"Look here," he said cheerfully. "Your path has opened up of its own accord.
Wherever Akemi's headed, it isn't right for you. Go now, before it's too late. Take
the path that comes out between Sakamoto and Ōtsu. You should catch up with
your mother before the day is out. Once you've found her, don't ever lose sight of
her again."
       To emphasize the point, he brought Matahachi's sandals and leggings, then
went into the inn and came back with his other belongings.
       "Do you have any money?" he asked. "I don't have much myself, but you
can have part of it. If you think Edo's the place for you, I'll go there with you.
Tonight I'll be at the Kara Bridge in Seta. After you find your mother, look for
me there. I'm counting on you to bring her."
       After Matahachi left, Musashi settled down to wait for twilight and the
reply to his letter. Stretching out on the bench in the back of the tea room, he
closed his eyes and was soon dreaming. Of two butterflies, drifting in the air,
frolicking among intertwining branches. One of the butterflies he recognized
...Otsū.
       When he awoke, the slanting rays of the sun had reached the back wall of
the tea room. He heard a man say, "However you look at it, it was a shoddy
performance."
       "You mean the Yoshiokas?"
       "That's right."

       "People had too much regard for the school, because of Kempō's
reputation. Looks like in any field only the first generation counts for much. The
next generation gets lackluster, and by the third, everything falls apart. You don't
often see the head of the fourth generation buried by the side of the founder."
       "Well, I intend to be buried right next to my great-grandfather."
       "You're nothing but a stonecutter anyway. I'm talking about famous people.
If you think I'm wrong, just look what happened to Hideyoshi's heir."
       The stonecutters worked in a quarry in the valley and around three o'clock
every afternoon came up to the inn for a cup of tea. Earlier, one of them, who
lived near Ichijōji, had claimed that he saw the battle from beginning to end.
Having already told his story dozens of times, he could now deliver it with
stirring eloquence, embroidering skillfully on facts and mimicking Musashi's
movements.
       While the stonecutters were listening raptly to this recital, four other men
had arrived and taken seats out front: Sasaki Kojirō and three samurai from
Mount Hiei. Their scowling faces made the workmen uneasy, so they'd picked
up their teacups and retreated inside. But as the saga gathered steam, they began
laughing and commenting, repeating Musashi's name frequently and with
obvious admiration.
       When Kojirō reached the limit of his forbearance, he called loudly, "You,
there!"
       "Yes, sir," they chorused, automatically bowing their heads.
       "What's going on here? You!" He pointed his steel-ribbed fan at the man.
"Talking as if you knew so much. Come out here! The rest of you too! I'm not
going to hurt you."
       As they shuffled outdoors again, he continued: "I've been listening to you
sing the praises of Miyamoto Musashi, and I've had enough. You're talking
nonsense!"
       There were questioning looks and murmurs of puzzlement.
       "Why do you consider Musashi a great swordsman? You—you say you
saw the fight the other day, but let me assure you, I, Sasaki Kojirō, also saw it.
As the official witness, I observed every detail. Later, I went to Mount Hiei and
lectured to the student priests on what I'd seen. Moreover, at the invitation of
some eminent scholars, I visited several subsidiary temples and gave more
lectures.
       "Now, unlike me, you men know nothing about swordsmanship."
Condescension was creeping into Kojirō's voice. "You see only who won and

who lost, then you join the herd and praise Miyamoto Musashi as though he
were the greatest swordsman who ever lived.
        "Ordinarily, I wouldn't bother to refute the prattle of ignoramuses, but I
feel it's necessary now, because your erroneous opinions are harmful to society
at large. Moreover, I wish to expose your fallacies for the benefit of these
distinguished scholars who accompany me today. Clean out your ears and listen
carefully! I'll tell you what actually happened at the spreading pine and what
kind of man Musashi is."
        Obedient noises issued from the captive audience.
        "In the first place," declaimed Kojirō, "let us consider what Musashi really
has in mind—his ulterior purpose. To judge from the way he provoked this last
bout, I can only conclude that he was trying desperately to sell his name, to
make a reputation for himself. To do this, he singled out the House of Yoshioka,
the most famous school of swordsmanship in Kyoto, and cleverly picked a fight.
By falling victim to this ruse, the House of Yoshioka became Musashi's
stepping-stone to fame and success.
        "What he did was dishonest. It was already common knowledge that the
days of Yoshioka Kempō were over, that the Yoshioka School had fallen into
decline. It was like a withered tree, or an invalid close to death. All Musashi had
to do was give a push to an empty hulk. Anyone could have done the same, but
no one did. Why? Because those of us who understand The Art of War already
knew the school was powerless. Second, because we did not wish to sully the
honored name of Kempō. Yet Musashi chose to provoke an incident, to place
challenging signs on the streets of Kyoto, to spread rumors and finally to make a
great spectacle of doing what any reasonably skillful swordsman could have
done.
        "I couldn't begin to enumerate all the cheap, cowardly tricks he resorted to.
Consider, for example, that he contrived to be late both for his bout with
Yoshioka Seijūrō and for his encounter with Denshichirō. Instead of meeting his
enemies head on at the spreading pine, he came by a roundabout way and
employed all sorts of base stratagems.
        "It's been pointed out that he was only one man fighting against many.
That's true, but it's only part of his devilish scheme for promoting his name. He
knew full well that because he was outnumbered, the public would sympathize
with him. And when it comes to the actual fighting, I can tell you—I observed it
personally—it was little more than child's play. Musashi managed to survive for
a time with his clever tricks, then, when the chance to flee presented itself, he

ran. Oh, I have to admit that to a certain extent he displayed a kind of brute
strength. But that doesn't make him an expert swordsman. No, not at all.
Musashi's greatest claim to fame is his ability to run fast. At making a rapid
getaway, he is without equal."
       The words were now streaming from Kojirō's mouth like water over a
dam.
       "Ordinary people think it's difficult for a lone swordsman to fight against a
great number of opponents, but ten men are not necessarily ten times stronger
than one man. To the expert, numbers are not always important." Kojirō then
gave a professional critique of the battle. It was easy to belittle Musashi's feat,
for despite his valor, any knowledgeable observer could have picked out flaws in
his performance. When he got around to mentioning Genjirō, Kojirō was
scathing. He said the boy's murder was an atrocity, a violation of the ethics of
swordsmanship, that could not be condoned from any point of view.
       "And let me tell you about Musashi's background," he cried indignantly.
He then revealed that within the past few days he'd met Osugi herself on Mount
Hiei and had heard the whole, long story of Musashi's duplicity. Sparing no
details, he recounted the wrongs suffered by this "sweet old woman."
       He ended by saying, "I shudder to think that there are people who shout
the praises of this rogue. The effect on public morals is terrifying to
contemplate! And this is the reason I've spoken at some length. I have no
connection with the House of Yoshioka, nor do I have any personal grudge
against Musashi. I've spoken to you fairly and impartially, as a man devoted to
the Way of the Sword and as one determined to follow righteously in that Way!
I've told you the truth. Remember it!"
       Falling silent, he eased his thirst with a cup of tea, then turned to his
companions and remarked very quietly, "Ah, the sun's already low in the sky. If
you don't start soon, it'll be dark before you reach the Miidera."
      The samurai from the temple rose to take their leave.
      "Take good care of yourself," said one of them.
      "We look forward to seeing you again when you return to Kyoto."
       The stonecutters saw their chance and, like prisoners freed by a tribunal,
hastened back to the valley, which was now cloaked in purplish shadows and
echoed with the singing of nightingales.
       Kojirō watched them go, then called into the inn, "I'll put the money for
the tea here on the table. By the way, do you have any matchlock fuses?"
       The old woman was squatting before the earthen oven, preparing the

evening meal. "Fuses?" she said. "There's a bunch hanging in the corner back
there. Take as many as you want."
       He strode to the corner. As he was pulling two or three of them out of a
sheaf, the rest fell on the bench below. Reaching to retrieve them, he couldn't
help noticing the two legs stretched out on the bench. His eyes traveled slowly
from legs to body to face. The shock was like a solid blow to the solar plexus.
       Musashi stared straight at him.
       Kojirō sprang back a step.
       "Well, well," said Musashi, grinning broadly. Unhurriedly he stood up and
went to Kojirō's side, where he stood silently, an amused and knowing
expression on his face.
       Kojirō tried to smile back, but his facial muscles refused to obey. He
realized instantly that Musashi must have overheard every word he'd said, and
his embarrassment was all the more unbearable because he felt Musashi was
laughing at him. It took him only a moment to recover his usual aplomb, but
during that brief interval his confusion was unmistakable.
       "Why, Musashi, I didn't expect to find you here," he said.
       "Nice to see you again."
       "Yes, yes, indeed." Regretting the words even as he spoke them, yet
somehow unable to help himself, he went on: "I must say, you've really
distinguished yourself since I last saw you. It's hard to believe a mere human
being could have fought the way you did. Let me congratulate you. You don't
even seem to be any the worse for it."
       The trace of a smile still on his lips, Musashi said, with exaggerated
politeness, "Thank you for acting as witness that day. And thank you also for the
critique you've just given of my performance. Not often are we allowed to see
ourselves as others see us. I am much indebted to you for your comments. I
assure you I won't forget them."
       Despite the quiet tone and lack of rancor, the last statement sent a chill
through Kojirō. He recognized it for what it was, a challenge that would have to
be met at some future date.
       These two men, both proud, both headstrong, both convinced of their own
rectitude, were bound to clash head on, sooner or later. Musashi was content to
wait, but when he said, "I won't forget," he was only speaking the simple truth.
He already regarded his most recent victory as a milestone in his career as a
swordsman, a high point in his struggle to perfect himself. Kojirō's calumnies
would not go unchallenged indefinitely.

      Though Kojirō had embellished his speech to sway his listeners, he
actually saw the event very much as he had described it, and his honest opinion
was not substantially different from what he had stated. Nor did he doubt for a
moment the fundamental accuracy of his appraisal of Musashi.
      "I'm glad to hear you say that," said Kojirō. "I wouldn't want you to forget.
Nor will I."
      Musashi was still smiling as he nodded his agreement.
