The Younger Brother


       Since ancient times, people of the highest classes had been able to ride in
palanquins, but it was only recently that a simplified type had become available
to the common people. It was little more than a large, low-sided basket
suspended from a horizontal carrying pole, and to avoid falling out, the
passenger had to hold on tightly to straps in front and back. The bearers,
chanting rhythmically to keep in step, had a tendency to treat their customers
like so much cargo. Those who chose this form of conveyance were advised to
adjust their breathing to the rhythm of the bearers, especially when they were
running.
       The palanquin moving rapidly toward the pine woods on Gojō Avenue was
accompanied by seven or eight men. Both the bearers and the other men were
panting as though they were about to spit up their hearts.
      "We're on Gojō Avenue."
      "Isn't this Matsubara?"
      "Not much farther."
       Though the lanterns they carried bore a crest used by courtesans in the
licensed quarter in Osaka, the passenger was no lady of the night.
       "Denshichirō!" called one of the attendants in front. "We're almost at Shijō
Avenue."
       Denshichirō did not hear; he was asleep, his head bobbing up and down
like a paper tiger's. Then the basket lurched, and a bearer put his hand out to
keep his passenger from being spilled onto the ground.
       Opening his large eyes, Denshichirō said, "I'm thirsty. Give me some
sake!"
       Thankful for a chance to rest, the bearers lowered the palanquin to the
ground and began wiping the clammy sweat off their faces and hairy chests with
hand towels.
       "There's not much sake left," said an attendant, handing the bamboo tube
to Denshichirō.
       He emptied it in one draft, then complained, "It's cold—sets my teeth on
edge." But it woke him up enough to observe, "It's still dark. We must have
made very good time."

       "As far as your brother is concerned, it must seem a long time. He's so
eager to see you that each minute is like a year."
       "I hope he's still alive."
       "The doctor said he would be. He's restless, though, and his wound
hemorrhages. That could be dangerous."
       Denshichirō lifted the empty tube to his lips and turned it upside down.
"Musashi!" he said disgustedly, throwing the tube away. "Let's go!" he bellowed.
"Hurry up!"
       Denshichirō, a strong drinker, an even stronger fighter and a quick-
tempered man, was almost the perfect antithesis of his brother. There were some
who, even when Kempō was still alive, had had the audacity to assert that he
was more capable than his father. The young man himself shared this view of his
talents. During their father's lifetime, the two brothers worked out together in the
dōjō and somehow managed to get along, but as soon as Kempō died,
Denshichirō stopped participating in the activities of the school and had gone so
far as to tell Seijūrō to his face that he should retire and leave matters concerning
swordsmanship to him.
       Since his departure for Ise the previous year, it had been rumored that he
was whiling away his time in Yamato Province. It was only after the disaster at
the Rendaiji that men were sent in search of him. Denshichirō, despite his
distaste for Seijūrō, readily consented to return.
       In the impatient rush back to Kyoto, he had driven the bearers so hard that
they had had to be changed three or four times. But he had found time to stop at
each station on the highway to buy sake. Perhaps the alcohol was needed to quiet
his nerves, for he was definitely in a state of extreme agitation.
      As they were about to get under way again, barking dogs in the dark woods
      attracted their attention.
      "What do you suppose is going on?"
      "Nothing but a pack of dogs."
       The city was full of stray dogs, great numbers of them coming in from the
outlying districts, now that there were no longer any battles to furnish them with
a supply of human meat.
       Denshichirō shouted angrily to stop dawdling, but one of the students said,
"Wait; there's something funny about what's going on over there."
       "Go see what it is," said Denshichirō, who then proceeded to take the lead
himself.
       After Kojirō left, the dogs had come back. The three or four circles of

canines around Matahachi and his tree were raising a tremendous racket. If dogs
were capable of the higher sentiments, it might be imagined that they were
taking revenge for the death of one of their flock. It is far more likely, however,
that they were merely tormenting a victim they sensed to be in an impossible
position, all of them being as hungry as wolves—their bellies concave,
backbones sharp as knives, and teeth so keen they might have been filed.
       Matahachi was far more afraid of them than he had been of Kojirō and
Gempachi. Unable to use his arms and legs, he had for weapons only his face
and his voice.
       After first having naively tried to reason with the animals, he switched
tactics. He howled like a wild beast. The dogs grew timid and backed off a little.
But then his nose started running, and the effect was immediately spoiled.
       Next he had opened his mouth and eyes as wide as he could and glared—
somehow managing not to blink. He'd wrinkled his face and stuck his tongue out
far enough to touch the tip of his nose, only to become quickly exhausted.
Ransacking his brain, he had resorted again to pretending that he himself was
just one of their number but had nothing against the rest of them. He barked,
even imagined that he had a tail to wag.
       The howling grew louder, the dogs closest to him baring their teeth in his
face and licking his feet.
       Hoping to soothe them with music, he began singing a famous passage
from Tales of the Heike, imitating the bards who went about reciting this story to
the accompaniment of the lute.


     Then the cloistered Emperor decided
     In the spring of the second year
     To see the country villa of Kenreimon'in,
     In the mountains near Ohara.
     But throughout the second and third months
     The wind was violent, the cold lingered on,
     Nor did the white snows on the mountain peaks melt.


     Eyes closed, face strained in a painful grimace, Matahachi sang almost
     loudly enough to deafen himself.
     He was still singing when the arrival of Denshichirō and his companions

      sent the dogs scurrying.
      Matahachi, beyond any pretense of dignity, cried, "Help! Save me!"
      "I've seen that guy at the Yomogi," said one of the samurai.
      "Yeah, that's Okō's husband."
      "Husband? She's not supposed to have a husband."
      "That's the story she told Tōji."
      Denshichirō, taking pity on Matahachi, ordered them to stop gossiping and
      set him free.
       In response to their questions, Matahachi made up a story in which his
sterling qualities figured prominently and his weaknesses not at all. Taking
advantage of the fact that he was talking to Yoshioka partisans, he brought up
Musashi's name. They had been childhood friends, he revealed, until Musashi
had abducted his fiancée and covered his family with unspeakable shame. His
valiant mother had vowed not to return home; both his mother and himself were
bent on finding Musashi and destroying him. As for being Okō's husband, this
was far from the truth. His long stay at the Yomogi Teahouse was not because of
any personal connection with the proprietress, and the proof of this was in her
having fallen in love with Gion Tōji.
       Then he explained why he was tied to a tree. He had been set upon by a
band of robbers, who had stolen his money. He had put up no resistance, of
course; he had to be careful not to be injured because of his obligation to his
mother.
       Hoping they were taking it all in, Matahachi said, "Thank you. I feel that
perhaps there is some fate that links us together. We regard one man as our
common enemy, an enemy we cannot live under the same sky with. Tonight you
came along at just the right moment. I am eternally grateful.
       "I would judge, sir, from your appearance that you are Denshichirō. I feel
certain you plan to meet Musashi. Which one of us will kill him first I cannot
say, but I hope I shall have the opportunity of seeing you again."
       He did not want to give them a chance to ask questions, so he hurried on.
"Osugi, my mother, is on a pilgrimage to Kiyomizudera to pray for success in
our battle against Musashi. I'm on my way to meet her now. I shall certainly call
soon at the house on Shijō Avenue to pay my respects. In the meantime, let me
apologize for holding you up when you are in such a hurry."
       And off he went, leaving his listeners to wonder how much truth there was
in what he had said.
       "Who on earth is that buffoon anyway?" snorted Denshichirō, clicking his

tongue over the time they had wasted.


       As the doctor had said, the first few days would be the worst. This was the
fourth day, and since the night before, Seijūrō felt a little better.
       Slowly he opened his eyes, wondering whether it was day or night. The
paper-covered lamp by his pillow was nearly out. From the next room came the
sound of snoring; the men watching over him had dropped off to sleep.
       "I must still be alive," he thought. "Alive and in complete disgrace!" He
pulled the quilt over his face with quivering fingers. "How can I face anyone
after this?" He swallowed hard to stifle his tears. "It's all over," he moaned. "The
end of me and the end of the House of Yoshioka."
       A cock crowed and the lamp went out with a sputter. As the pale light of
dawn crept into the room, he was taken back to that morning at the Rendaiji. The
look in Musashi's eyes! The memory made him shiver. He had to admit he'd
been no match for that man. Why hadn't he thrown down his wooden sword,
accepted defeat and made an attempt to save the family's reputation?
       "I had too high an opinion of myself," he moaned. "Besides being the son
of Yoshioka Kempō, what have I ever done to distinguish myself?"
       Even he had come to realize that sooner or later, time would have caught
up with the House of Yoshioka if he had stayed in charge. With everything else
changing, it could not continue to prosper.
      "My bout with Musashi only hastened the collapse. Why couldn't I have
      died there? Why do I have to live?"
      He knitted his brows. His armless shoulder throbbed with pain.
      Only seconds after the banging on the front gate, a man came to wake up
      the samurai in the room next to Seijūrō's.
      "Denshichirō?" exclaimed a startled voice.
      "Yes; he just arrived."
      Two men rushed out to meet him, another ran to Seijūrō's side. "Young
      Master! Good news! Denshichirō's back."
       The rain shutters were opened, charcoal put in the brazier, and a cushion
spread on the floor. After a moment, Denshichirō's voice came from beyond the
shoji. "Is my brother in here?"
       Seijūrō thought nostalgically: "It's been a long time." Though he had asked
to see Denshichirō, he dreaded being seen in his present state even by his brother
—no, especially by his brother. As Denshichirō entered, Seijūrō looked up wanly

and tried, unsuccessfully, to smile.
       Denshichirō spoke with gusto. "See?" He laughed. "When you're in
trouble, your good-for-nothing brother comes back to help you. I dropped
everything and came as fast as I could. We stopped in Osaka for provisions, then
traveled all night. I'm here now, so you can stop worrying. Whatever happens, I
won't let a soul lay a finger on the school... .
       "What's this?" he said gruffly, turning to a servant who had brought tea. "I
don't need any tea! Go and get some sake ready." Then he shouted for someone
to close the outside doors. "Are you all crazy? Can't you see my brother's cold?"
       Sitting down, he leaned over the brazier and stared silently at the sick
man's face. "Just what kind of stance did you take in the fight?" he asked. "Why
did you lose? Maybe this Miyamoto Musashi's making a name for himself, but
he's no more than a rank beginner, is he? How could you let yourself be taken off
guard by a nobody like him?"
      From the doorway, one of the students called Denshichirō's name. "Well,
      what is it?"
      "The sake is ready."
      "Bring it in!"
      "I've set a place in the other room. You'll be wanting a bath first, won't
      you?"
      "I don't want a bath! Bring the sake in here."
      "Right by the Young Master's bedside?"
       "Why not? I haven't seen him for a few months, and I want to talk to him.
We haven't always been on the best of terms, but there's nothing like a brother
when you need one. I'll drink it here with him."
      He poured himself a cupful, then another and another. "Ah, this is good. If
      you were well, I'd pour some for you too."
      Seijūrō put up with this for a few minutes, then raised his eyes and said,
      "Would you mind not drinking here?"
      "Uh?"
      "It brings back a lot of unpleasant memories."
      "Oh?"
       "I'm thinking of our father. He wouldn't be pleased at the way you and I
have always indulged ourselves. And what good has it ever done either one of
us?"
       "What's the matter with you?"
       "Maybe you don't see it yet, but lying here, I've had time to regret my

wasted life."
       Denshichirō laughed. "Speak for yourself! You've always been a nervous,
sensitive type. That's why you've never become a real swordsman. If you want
the truth, I think it was a mistake for you to take Musashi on. But then it doesn't
make much difference whether it's Musashi or somebody else. Fighting's just not
in your blood. You should let this defeat be a lesson to you and forget about
swordsmanship. As I told you a long time ago, you should retire. You could still
preside over the House of Yoshioka, and if there's anyone so intent on
challenging you that you can't get out of it, I'll fight in your stead.
       "Leave the dōjō to me from now on. I'll prove I can make it several times
as successful as it was in our father's time. If you'll just put aside your suspicions
that I'm trying to take your school away from you, I'll show you what I can do."
He poured the last of the sake into his cup.
       "Denshichirō!" cried Seijūrō. He tried to rise from his pallet, but couldn't
even push aside the covers. Falling back, he reached out and grasped his
brother's wrist.
      "Watch out!" sputtered Denshichirō. "You'll make me spill this." He shifted
      his cup to his other hand.
      "Denshichirō, I'll gladly let you have the school, but you'll have to take over
      my position as head of the house too."
      "All right, if that's the way you want it."
       "You shouldn't undertake the burden so lightly. You'd better give it some
thought. I'd rather ... close the place down than have you make the same
mistakes I did and bring greater disgrace on our father's name."
      "Don't be ridiculous. I'm not like you."
      "Do you promise to mend your ways?"
      "Hold on! I'll drink if I want—if that's what you mean."
       "I don't care about your drinking, if you don't carry it to excess. After all,
the mistakes I made didn't really come from sake."
       "Ah, I'll bet your trouble was women. You always did like them too much.
What you should do when you get well is marry and settle down."
       "No. I'm giving up the sword, but it's no time to think about taking a wife.
Yet there is one person I must do something for. If I can be sure she's happy, I'll
ask for nothing more. I'll be content to live by myself in a thatched hut in the
woods."
       "Who is she?"
       "Never mind; it doesn't concern you. As a samurai, I feel I should hang on

and try to redeem myself. But I can swallow my pride. You take charge of the
school."
       "I'll do that. You have my promise. I also swear that before long I'll clear
your name too. Just where is Musashi now?"
       "Musashi?" Seijūrō choked. "You're not thinking of fighting Musashi! I've
just warned you not to make the same mistakes I did."
       "What else could I be thinking of? Isn't that why you sent for me? We have
to find Musashi before he escapes. If it weren't for that, what point was there in
my coming home so fast?"
      "You don't know what you're talking about." Seijūrō shook his head. "I
      forbid you to fight Musashi!"
      Denshichirō's tone became resentful. Taking orders from his elder brother
      had always annoyed him.
      "And why not?"
      A tinge of pink appeared on Seijūrō's pale cheeks. "You can't win!" he said
      curtly.
      "Who can't?" Denshichirō's face was livid.
       "You can't. Not against Musashi."
       "Why can't I?"
       "You're not good enough!"
       "Nonsense!" Denshichirō deliberately broke into a laugh that shook his
shoulders. Pulling his hand loose from Seijūrō's, he upended the sake jar.
"Somebody bring sake," he bellowed. "There's none left."


       By the time a student came with the sake, Denshichirō was no longer in
the room, and Seijūrō was lying face down under the covers. When the student
straightened him around and put his head on the pillow, he said softly, "Call him
back. I've something more to say to him."
       Relieved that the Young Master was speaking clearly, the man ran out to
look for Denshichirō. He found him seated on the floor of the dōjō, with Ueda
Ryōhei and Miike Jūrōzaemon, Nampo Yoichibei, Ōtaguro Hyōsuke and a few
more of the senior disciples.
      One was asking, "Have you seen the Young Master?"
      "Mm. I just came from his room."
      "He must have been happy to see you."
       "He didn't seem too pleased. Until I went to his room, I'd been eager to see

him. But he was dejected and cross, so I said what I had to say. We got into a
quarrel, as usual."
       "You argued with him? You shouldn't have done that. He's only just
beginning to recover."
       "Wait till you hear the whole story."
       Denshichirō and the senior disciples were like old chums. He grabbed the
reproachful Ryōhei by the shoulder and shook him in a friendly way.
       "Listen to what my brother said," he began. "He said I shouldn't try to
clear his name by fighting Musashi, because I couldn't win! And if I was
defeated, the House of Yoshioka would be ruined. He told me he'd retire and
accept sole responsibility for the disgrace. He doesn't expect me to do any more
than carry on in his place and work hard to put the school back on its feet."
      "I see."
      "What do you mean by that?"
      Ryōhei didn't answer.
       As they sat there in silence, the student came in and said to Denshichirō,
"The Young Master wants you to come back to his room."
      Denshichirō scowled. "What happened to the sake?" he snapped. "I left it in
      Seijūrō's room."
      "Well, bring it here!"
      "What about your brother?"
      "He seems to be suffering from a case of the jitters. Do as I say."
       The protestations of the others that they did not want any, that this was no
time to be drinking, annoyed Denshichirō and he lashed out at them. "What's the
matter with all of you? Are you afraid of Musashi too?"
       Shock, pain and bitterness were evident in their faces. To their dying day,
they would remember how with a single blow of a wooden sword their master
had been crippled and the school disgraced. Still, they had been unable to agree
on a plan of action. Every discussion over the past three days had split them into
two factions, some favoring a second challenge, others arguing for leaving bad
enough alone. Now a few of the older men looked approvingly at Denshichirō,
but the rest, Ryōhei included, were inclined to agree with their defeated master.
Unfortunately, it was one thing for Seijūrō to urge forbearance and quite another
for the students to agree, particularly in the presence of this hotheaded younger
brother.
       Denshichirō, observing their hesitancy, declared, "Even if my brother is
injured, he has no business behaving like a coward. Just like a woman! How

could I be expected to listen, let alone agree?"
       The sake had been brought, and he proceeded to pour each man a cup.
Now that he was going to be running things, he intended to set the tone he
himself liked: this would be a real man's outfit.
       "This is what I'm going to do," he announced. "I'll fight Musashi and
defeat him! It doesn't matter what my brother says. If he thinks we should let this
man get away with what he did, it's no wonder he got beaten. Don't any of you
make the mistake of thinking I'm yellow like him."
      Nampo Yoichibei spoke up. "There's no question about your ability. We all
      have confidence in that, but still ..."
      "But still what? What's on your mind?"
      "Well, your brother seems to be of the opinion that Musashi isn't important.
      He's right, isn't he? Think of the risk—"
      "Risk?" howled Denshichirō.
      "I didn't mean it that way! I take it back," stammered Yoichibei.
      But the damage was done. Denshichirō, jumping up and seizing him by the
      scruff of the neck, threw him violently against the wall.
      "Get out of here! Coward!"
      "It was a slip of the tongue. I didn't mean to—"
      "Shut up! Out! Weaklings aren't fit to drink with me."
       Yoichibei turned pale, then quietly sank to his knees, facing the others. "I
thank you all for letting me stay among you so long," he said simply. He went to
the small Shinto shrine in the back of the room, bowed and left.
       Without so much as a glance in his direction, Denshichirō said, "Now let's
all drink together. After that, I want you to find Musashi. I doubt that he's left
Kyoto yet. He's probably swaggering around town boasting of his victory.
       "And another thing. We're going to put some life back into this dōjō. I
want each of you to practice hard and see that your fellow students do too. As
soon as I've had a rest, I'll start practicing myself. And remember one thing. I'm
not soft like my brother. I want even the youngest to go at it for all they're
worth."


      Exactly a week later, one of the younger students came running into the
dōjō with the news: "I've found him!"
      Denshichirō, true to his word, had been training relentlessly day after day.
His seemingly inexhaustible energy came as a surprise to the disciples, a group

of whom were now watching him take care of Ōtaguro, one of the most
experienced among them, as though he were a child.
      "We'll stop now," said Denshichirō, withdrawing his sword and sitting
down at the edge of the practice area. "You say you've found him?"
     "Yes." The student came and knelt before Denshichirō.
     "Where?"
     "East of Jissōin, in Hon'ami Lane. Musashi's staying at the house of
     Hon'ami Kōetsu. I'm sure of it."
      "Strange. How would a rustic like Musashi get to know a man like
Kōetsu?" "I don't know, but that's where he is."
      "All right, let's go after him. Now!" barked Denshichirō, striding off to
make his preparations. Ōtaguro and Ueda, trailing along behind, tried to dissuade
him.
      "Taking him by surprise would make it look like a common brawl. People
would disapprove, even if we carried it off."
      "Never mind. Etiquette is for the dōjō. In a real battle, he who wins, wins!"
      "True, but that isn't the way that oaf defeated your brother. Don't you think
it would be more befitting a swordsman to send him a letter specifying the time
and place, then beat him fair and square?"
      "Urn, maybe you're right. All right, we'll do it that way. In the meantime I
don't want any of you to let my brother talk you into opposing me. I'll fight
Musashi whatever Seijūrō or anybody else says."
     "We've gotten rid of all the men who disagreed with you, as well as the
     ingrates who wanted to leave."
     "Good! We're that much stronger. We have no need of crooks like Gion Tōji
     or timid souls like Nampo Yoichibei."
     "Should we mention it to your brother before sending the letter?" "Not you,
     no! I'll do it myself."
      As he went off toward Seijūrō's room, the others prayed there wouldn't be
another fraternal clash; neither brother had budged an inch on the question of
Musashi. When after a time no loud voices were heard, the students took up the
matter of time and place for this second confrontation with their mortal foe.
      Then Denshichirō's voice rang out. "Ueda! Miike! Ōtaguro ... all of you!
Come here!"
      Denshichirō was standing in the middle of the room with a clouded look
on his face and tears in his eyes. No one had ever seen him like this.
      "Take a look at this, all of you."

       He held up a long, long letter and said, with forced anger, "See what my
idiot brother has done now. He had to tell me his opinions again, but he's gone
for good.... Didn't even say where he's going."
