A Toast to the Morrow


       Matahachi paused on the pebbled road and wiped the sweat from his
forehead. He had run all the way from Gojō Avenue to Sannen Hill. His face was
quite red, but this was due more to the sake he'd drunk than to the rare physical
exertion. Ducking through the dilapidated gate, he trotted round to the little
house beyond the vegetable garden.
     "Mother!" he called urgently. Then he glanced into the house and muttered,
     "Is she sleeping again?"
     After stopping by the well to wash his hands and feet, he entered the house.
     Osugi stopped snoring, opened one eye and roused herself. "Why are you
     making such a racket?" she asked grumpily.
     "Oh, are you finally awake?"
     "What do you mean by that?"
       "All I have to do is sit down for a minute and you start griping about how
lazy I am, nagging at me to search for Musashi."
       "Well, pardon me," Osugi said indignantly, "for being old. I have to sleep
for my health, but nothing's wrong with my spirit. I haven't felt well since the
night Otsū got away. And my wrist, where Takuan grabbed it, is still sore."
     "Why is it every time I feel good, you start complaining about something?"
     Osugi glared. "You don't often hear me complain, in spite of my age. Have
     you found out anything about Otsū or Musashi?"
     "The only people in town who haven’t heard the news are old women who
     sleep all day."
     "News! What news?" Osugi was immediately on her knees, crawling closer
     to her son.
     "Musashi's going to have a third bout with the Yoshioka School." "When?
     Where?"
     "There's a sign at Yanagimachi with all the details. It's going to be in
     Ichijōji Village early tomorrow morning."
       "Yanagimachi! That's the licensed quarter." Osugi's eyes narrowed. "What
were you doing loafing in the middle of the day in a place like that?"
       "I wasn't loafing," Matahachi said defensively. "You always take things the
wrong way. I was there because it's a good place to pick up news."

       "Never mind; I was just teasing. I'm satisfied you've settled down and
won't go back to the wicked life you were leading. But did I hear you right? Did
you say tomorrow morning?"
      "Yes, at five o'clock."
      Osugi thought. "Didn't you tell me you knew somebody at the Yoshioka
      School?"
      "Yes, but I didn't meet them under very favorable circumstances. Why?"
      "I want you to take me to the school, right now. Get yourself ready."
       Matahachi was again struck by the impetuousness of the aged. Without
making a move, he said coolly, "Why get excited? Anybody would think the
house was on fire. What do you expect to accomplish by going to the Yoshioka
School?"
       "Volunteer our services, of course."
       "Huh?"
       "They're going out to kill Musashi tomorrow. I'll ask them to let us join
them. We may not be much help, but we can probably get in at least one good
blow."
      "Mother, you must be joking!" Matahachi laughed.
      "What do you find so funny?"
      "You're so simple-minded."
       "How dare you speak that way! You're the one who's simple-minded."
"Instead of arguing, go out and look around. The Yoshiokas are out for blood;
this is their last chance. The rules of fighting aren't going to mean anything to
them. The only way they can possibly save the House of Yoshioka is by killing
Musashi—any way they can. It's no secret they're going to attack in force."
       "Is that so?" Osugi purred. "Then Musashi's bound to be killed.... Isn't he?"
       "I'm not so sure. He may bring men to help him. And if he does, it'll be
quite a battle. That's what a lot of people think will happen."
       "They may be right, but it's still annoying. We can't just sit on our hands
and let somebody else kill him after searching for him all this time."
       "I agree, and I've got a plan," Matahachi said excitedly. "If we get there
before the battle, we can present ourselves to the Yoshiokas and tell them why
we're after Musashi. I'm sure they'll let us strike a blow at the corpse. Then we
can take some of his hair, or a sleeve, or something like that, and use it to prove
to the people back home that we killed him. That would restore our standing,
wouldn't it?"
       "That's a good plan, my son. I doubt if there's any better way." Apparently

forgetting that she had once suggested the same thing to him, she sat straight and
squared her shoulders. "Not only would it clear our name, but with Musashi
dead, Otsū would be like a fish out of water."
      His mother's calm restored, Matahachi felt relieved—but also thirsty again.
"Well, that's settled. We have a few hours to wait. Don't you think we should
have some sake before dinner?"
     "Hmm; all right. Have some brought out here. I'll have a little myself to
     celebrate our approaching victory."
     As he put his hands on his knees and started to get up, he glanced to one
     side, blinked and stared.
     "Akemi!" he cried, and ran to the small window.
      She was cowering under a tree just outside, like a guilty cat that had not
quite managed to flee in time. Staring with disbelieving eyes, she gasped,
"Matahachi, is that you?"
     "What brought you here?"
     "Oh, I've been staying here for some time."
     "I had no idea. Are you with Okō?"
     "No."
     "Don't you live with her anymore?"
     "No. You know Gion Tōji, don't you?"
     "I've heard of him."
     "He and Mother ran away together." Her little bell tinkled as she raised her
     sleeve to hide her tears.
      The light in the shade of the tree had a bluish tinge; the nape of her neck,
her delicate hand, everything about her looked very different from the Akemi he
remembered. The girlish glow that had so enchanted him at Ibuki and relieved
his gloom at the Yomogi was no longer in evidence.
      "Matahachi," said Osugi suspiciously, "who's that you're talking to?" "It's
the girl I told you about before. Okō's daughter."
      "Her? What was she doing, eavesdropping?"
      Matahachi turned, saying heatedly, "Why do you always jump to
conclusions? She's staying here too. She just happened to be passing by. Right,
Akemi?"
     "Yes, I didn't dream you were here, though I saw that girl named Otsū here
     once.
     "Did you talk to her?"
     "Not really, but later I got to wondering. Isn't she the girl you were engaged

      to?"
      "Yes."
       "I thought so. My mother caused you a lot of trouble, didn't she?"
Matahachi ignored the question. "Are you still single? You look different
somehow."
       "Mother made life miserable for me after you left. I put up with it as long
as I could, because she is my mother. But last year, when we were in Sumiyoshi,
I ran away."
       "She messed up both our lives, didn't she? But you just wait and see. In the
end, she'll get what she deserves."
       "I don't even care if she doesn't. I just wish I knew what I'm going to do
from now on."
       "Me too. The future doesn't look very bright. I'd like to get even with Okō,
but I suppose all I'll ever do is think about it."
       While they were complaining about their difficulties, Osugi had busied
herself with her travel preparations. Now, with a click of her tongue, she said
sharply, "Matahachi! Why are you standing there grumbling to somebody who
has nothing to do with us? Come help me pack!"
       "Yes, Mother."
       "Good-bye, Matahachi. See you again." Looking dejected and ill at ease,
Akemi hurried away.
       Presently a lamp was lit, and the maid appeared with dinner trays and sake.
Mother and son exchanged cups without looking at the bill, which lay on the tray
between them. The servants, who came one by one to pay their respects, were
followed by the innkeeper himself.
       "So you're leaving tonight?" he said. "It's been good having you with us
for so long. I'm sorry we haven't been able to give you the special treatment you
deserve. We hope to see you again when you're next in Kyoto."
       "Thank you," replied Osugi. "I may very well come again. Let's see, it's
been three months, hasn't it—since the end of the year?"
      "Yes, about that. We'll miss you."
      "Won't you have a little sake with us?"
      "That's very kind of you. It's quite unusual to be leaving at night. What
      made you decide to do that?"
       "To tell the truth, some important business came up very suddenly. By the
way, do you happen to have a map of Ichijōji Village?"
       "Let's see, that's a little place on the other side of Shirakawa, near the top

of Mount Hiei. I don't think you'd better be going there in the middle of the
night. It's quite deserted and—"
       "That doesn't matter," interrupted Matahachi. "Would you please just draw
us a map?"
       "I'll be glad to. One of my servants comes from there. He can furnish me
with the information I need. Ichijōji, you know, doesn't have many people, but
it's spread out over quite a large area."
       Matahachi, a little drunk, said curtly, "Don't worry about where we're
going. We just want to know how to get there."
       "Oh, forgive me. Take your time with your preparations." Rubbing his
hands together obsequiously, he bowed his way out onto the veranda.
       As he was about to step down into the garden, three or four of his
employees came running up, the chief clerk saying excitedly, "Didn't she come
this way?"
      "Who?"
      "That girl, the one who was staying in the back room."
      "Well, what about her?"
      "I'm sure I saw her earlier in the evening, but then I looked in her room, and
      —"
      "Get to the point!"
      "We can't find her."
       "You idiot!" shouted the innkeeper, his outraged face devoid of the oily
servility he had shown a few moments ago. "What's the use of running around
like this after she's gone? You should have known from her looks there was
something wrong. You let a week go by without making sure she had money?
How can I stay in business with you doing stupid things like that?"
       "I'm sorry, sir. She seemed decent."
       "Well, it's too late now. You'd better see whether anything's missing from
the other guest rooms. Oh, what a pack of dunces!" He stormed off toward the
front of the inn.
       Osugi and Matahachi drank a little more sake, then the old woman
switched to tea and advised her son to do likewise.
       "I'll just finish what's here," he said, pouring himself another cup. "I don't
want anything to eat."
       "It's not good for you not to eat. Have a little rice and some pickles at
least." Clerks and servants were running about in the garden and passageways,
waving their lanterns.

      "They don't seem to have caught her," said Osugi. "I don't want to get
involved, so I kept quiet in front of the innkeeper, but don't you think the girl
they're looking for is the one you were talking to earlier?
     "I wouldn't be surprised."
     "Well, you couldn't expect much from somebody with a mother like hers.
     Why on earth were you so friendly with her?"
     "I feel kind of sorry for her. She's had a hard life."
      "Well, be careful and don't let on that you know her. If the innkeeper
thinks she has some connection with us, he'll demand that we pay her bill."
      Matahachi had other things on his mind. Clutching the back of his head, he
lay back and grumbled, "I could kill that whore! I can see her face now.
Musashi's not the one who led me astray. It was Okō!"
      Osugi rebuked him sharply. "Don't be stupid! Supposing you killed Okō—
what good would it do our reputation? Nobody in the village knows or cares
about her."
      At two o'clock the innkeeper came to the veranda with a lantern and
announced the time.
      Matahachi stretched and asked, "Did you catch the girl?"
      "No; no sign of her." He sighed. "She was pretty, so the clerks thought that
even if she couldn't pay her bill, we could get back the money by having her live
here for a while, if you see what I mean. Unfortunately, she was a bit too fast for
us."
      Sitting on the edge of the veranda, Matahachi tied his sandals. After
waiting a minute or so, he called irritably, "Mother, what are you doing in there?
You're always hurrying me up, but at the last minute you're never ready!"
      "Just hold on. Matahachi, did I give you the money pouch I carry in my
traveling bag? I paid the bill with some cash from my stomach wrapper, but our
travel money was in the pouch."
      "I haven't seen it."
      "Come here a minute. Here's a scrap of paper with your name on it. What!
... Why, of all the nerve! It says ... it says that because of her long acquaintance
with you, she hopes you'll pardon her for borrowing the money. Borrowing ...
borrowing!"
      "That's Akemi's writing."
      Osugi turned on the innkeeper. "Look here! If a guest's property is stolen,
the responsibility is yours. You'll have to do something about this."
      "Is that so?" He smiled broadly. "Ordinarily, that would be the case, but

since it appears you knew the girl, I'm afraid I'll have to ask you to take care of
her bill first."
      Osugi's eyes darted back and forth wildly, as she stammered, "Wh-what
are you talking about? Why, I never saw that thieving wench before in my life.
Matahachi! Stop fooling around! If we don't get started, the cock will be
crowing."
