The Male and Female Waterfalls


       "Whew, it's hot!" Jōtarō exclaimed. "I've never sweated like this on a
mountain road before. Where are we?"
       "Near Magome Pass," said Musashi. "They say it's the most difficult
section of the highroad."
       "Well, I don't know about that, but I've had enough of this. I'll be glad to
get to Edo. Lots of people there—right, Otsū?"
      "There are, but I'm in no hurry to get there. I'd rather pass the time traveling
      on a lonely road like this."
      "That's because you're riding. You'd feel different if you were walking.
      Look! There's a waterfall over there."
      "Let's take a rest," said Musashi.
       The three of them made their way along a narrow path. All around, the
ground was covered with wild flowers, still damp with morning dew. Coming to
a deserted hut on a cliff overlooking the falls, they stopped. Jōtarō helped Otsū
off the cow, then tied the animal to a tree.
       "Look, Musashi," said Otsū. She was pointing at a sign that read: "Meoto
no Taki." The reason for the name, "Male and Female Waterfalls," was easy to
understand, for rocks split the falls into two sections, the larger one looking very
virile, the other one small and gentle.
       The roiling basin and rapids below the falls fired Jōtarō with renewed
energy. Half jumping, half dancing down the steep bank, he called up excitedly,
"There're fish down here!"
      A few minutes later, he cried, "I can catch them! I threw a rock and one
      rolled over dead."
      Not long after that, his voice, barely audible above the roar of the falls,
      echoed back from still another direction.
      In the shadow of the little hut, Musashi and Otsū sat among countless tiny
      rainbows made by the sun shining on the wet grass.
      "Where has that boy gone, do you suppose?" she asked, adding, "He's really
      impossible to manage."
       "Do you think so? I was worse than that at his age. Matahachi, though, was
just the opposite, really very well behaved. I wonder where he is. He worries me

far more than Jōtarō."
      "I'm glad he's not here. I'd have to hide if he was."
      "Why? I think he'd understand if we explained."
      "I doubt it. He and his mother aren't like other people."
      "Otsū, are you sure you won't change your mind?"
      "About what?"
      "I mean, mightn't you decide you really want to marry Matahachi?"
       Her face twitched with shock. "Absolutely not!" she replied indignantly.
Her eyelids turned orchid pink, and she covered her face with her hands, but the
slight trembling of her white collar almost seemed to cry out, "I'm yours, no one
else's!"
       Regretting his words, Musashi turned his eyes toward her. For several days
now he had watched the play of light on her body—at night, the flickering glow
of a lamp; in the daytime, the warm rays of the sun. Seeing her skin glisten with
perspiration, he'd thought of the lotus blossom. Separated from her pallet by only
a flimsy screen, he'd inhaled the faint scent of her black tresses. Now the roar of
the water became one with the throbbing of his blood, and he felt himself being
swallowed up by a powerful impulse.
      Abruptly he stood up and moved to a sunny spot where the winter grass was
      still high, then sat down heavily and heaved a sigh.
      Otsū came and knelt at his side, put her arms around his knees and twisted
      her neck to look up into his silent, frightened face.
      "What is it?" she asked. "Did something I said make you angry? Forgive
      me. I'm sorry."
       The more tense he became—and the harsher the look in his eyes—the
more closely she clung to him. Then all at once she threw her arms around him.
Her fragrance, the warmth of her body, overwhelmed him.
       "Otsū!" he cried impetuously as he seized her in his brawny arms and
threw her backward onto the grass.
       The roughness of the embrace took her breath away. She struggled free
and crouched beside him.
       "You mustn't! You mustn't do that!" she shrieked hoarsely. "How could
you? You, of all people—" She broke off, sobbing.
       His burning passion suddenly chilled by the pain and horror in her eyes,
Musashi came to himself with a jolt. "Why?" he cried. "Why?" Overcome by
shame and anger, he himself was on the verge of tears.
       Then she was gone, leaving behind only a sachet, which had broken loose

from her kimono. Staring blankly at it, Musashi groaned, then turned his face to
the ground and let the tears of pain and frustration flow into the withered grass.
       He felt she'd made a fool of him—deceived, defeated, tortured and shamed
him. Hadn't her words—her lips, her eyes, her hair, her body—been calling out
to him? Hadn't she labored to light a fire in his heart, then when the flames burst
forth, fled in terror?
       By some perverse logic, it seemed that all his efforts to become a superior
person had been defeated, all his struggles and privations had been rendered
utterly meaningless. His face buried in the grass, he told himself he'd done
nothing wrong, but his conscience wasn't satisfied.
       What a girl's virginity, vouchsafed to her for only a short period of her life,
meant to her—how precious and sweet it was—was a question that never entered
his mind.
       But as he breathed in the smell of the earth, he gradually regained his self-
control. When he eventually dragged himself to his feet, the raging fire was gone
from his eyes and his face was devoid of passion. Trampling the sachet
underfoot, he stood looking intently at the ground, listening, it seemed, to the
voice of the mountains. His heavy black eyebrows were knit together just as they
had been when he threw himself into battle under the spreading pine.
       The sun went behind a cloud, and the sharp screech of a bird split the air.
The wind changed, subtly altering the sound of the falling water.
       Otsū, her heart fluttering like a frightened sparrow's, observed his agony
from behind a birch tree. Realizing how deeply she had hurt him, she now
longed to have him at her side again, but as much as she wanted to run to him
and beg forgiveness, her body would not obey. For the first time, she realized
that the lover she had given her heart to was not the vision of masculine virtues
she had imagined. Discovering the naked beast, the flesh and blood and
passions, clouded her eyes with sadness and fear.
       She had started to run away, but after twenty paces, her love caught and
held her. Now, a little calmer, she began to imagine that Musashi's lust was
different from that of other men. More than anything else in the world, she
wanted to apologize and assure him she harbored no resentment for what he'd
done.
       "He's still angry," she thought fearfully, suddenly realizing he was no
longer before her eyes. "Oh, what'll I do?"
       Nervously, she went back to the little hut, but there was only a cold white
mist and the thundering of the water, which seemed to shake the trees and stir up

vibrations all around her.
       "Otsū! Something awful's happened! Musashi's thrown himself into the
water!" Jōtarō's frantic cry came from a promontory overlooking the basin, just a
second before he grabbed a wisteria vine and began descending, swinging from
branch to branch like a monkey.
       Though she hadn't caught the actual words, Otsū heard the urgency in his
voice. She raised her head in alarm and began clambering down the steep path,
slipping on the moss, then clinging to rocks to steady herself.
       The figure just visible through the spray and mist resembled a large rock
but was actually Musashi's naked body. Hands clasped in front of him, head
bowed, he was dwarfed by the fifty-foot flood cascading down on him.
       Halfway down, Otsū stopped and stared in horror. Across the river, Jōtarō
stood similarly transfixed.
       "Sensei!" he cried.
       "Musashi!"
       Their shouts never reached Musashi's ears. It was as though a thousand
silver dragons were nipping at his head and shoulders, the eyes of a thousand
water demons exploding around him. Treacherous eddies tugged at his legs,
ready to pull him to his death. One false rhythm in breathing, one faltering
heartbeat, and his heels would lose their tenuous hold on the algae-covered
bottom, his body would be swept up in a violent current from which there was
no return. His lungs and heart seemed to be collapsing under the incalculable
weight—the total mass of the Magome mountains—falling on him.
       His desire for Otsū died a slow death, for it was closely akin to the hot-
blooded temperament without which he would never have gone to Sekigahara or
accomplished any of his extraordinary feats. But the real danger lay in the fact
that at a certain point, all his years of training became powerless against it and he
sank again to the level of a wild, mindless beast. And against an enemy like this,
formless and hidden, the sword was utterly useless. Bewildered, perplexed,
conscious of the devastating defeat he'd suffered, he prayed that the raging
waters might bring him back to his quest for discipline.
       "Sensei! Sensei!" Jōtarō's shouts had become a tearful wailing. "You
mustn't die! Please don't die!" He, too, had clasped his hands in front of his
chest, and his face was contorted, as if he, too, were bearing the weight of the
water, the sting, the pain, the cold.
       Glancing across the river, Jōtarō suddenly felt himself go limp.
       He couldn't make any sense out of what Musashi was doing; apparently he

was determined to stay under the torrent until he died, but now Otsū—Where
was she? He was sure she'd leaped to her death in the river below.
      Then, above the sound of the water, he heard Musashi's voice. The words
weren't clear. He thought it might be a sutra, but then ... maybe they were angry
oaths of self-recrimination.
      The voice was full of strength and life. Musashi's broad shoulders and
muscular body exuded youth and vigor, as if his soul had been cleansed and was
now ready to begin life afresh.
      Jōtarō began to feel that whatever had been wrong had passed. As the light
of the evening sun made a rainbow above the falls, he called, "Otsū!" and dared
to hope that she had left the cliffside simply because she thought Musashi was in
no real danger. "If she's confident he's all right," he thought, "there's nothing for
me to worry about. She knows him better than I do, right down to the bottom of
his heart."
      Jōtarō skipped lightly down to the river, found a narrow place, crossed it
and climbed up the other side. Approaching silently, he saw that Otsū was inside
the hut, huddled on the floor with Musashi's kimono and swords clutched to her
bosom.
      Jōtarō sensed that her tears, which she made no effort to hide, were
somehow not ordinary tears. And without really understanding what had
happened, he felt it was of grave concern to Otsū. After a couple of minutes, he
slipped quietly back to where the cow lay in the whitish grass and sprawled out
beside her.
      "At this rate, we'll never get to Edo," he said.
