Stray Geese


      "Wait for me, Matahachi. Why do you have to walk so fast?" Osugi, far
behind and completely winded, had forfeited both patience and pride.
      Matahachi, in a voice calculated to be heard, grumbled, "She was in such a
hurry when we left the inn, but listen to her now. She talks better than she
walks."
      As far as the foot of Mount Daimonji, they had been on the road to
Ichijōji, but now, deep in the mountains, they were lost.
      Osugi would not give up. "The way you keep picking on me," she rasped,
"anybody would think you had a terrible grudge against your own mother." By
the time she had wiped the sweat from her wrinkled face, Matahachi was off
again.
      "Won't you slow down?" she cried. "Let's sit here for a while."
      "If you keep stopping every ten feet to rest, we won't be there before
sunrise."
      "The sun won't be up for a long time yet. Ordinarily I wouldn't have any
trouble on a mountain road like this, but I'm coming down with a cold."
      "You'll never admit you're wrong, will you? Back there, when I woke up
the innkeeper so you could rest, you couldn't sit still for a minute. You didn't
want anything to drink, so you started carrying on about how we'd be late. I
hadn't had two sips before you dragged me out of the place. I know you're my
mother, but you're a hard woman to get along with."
      "Ha! Still peeved because I wouldn't let you drink yourself silly. Is that it?
Why can't you exercise a little restraint? We have important things to do today."
      "It's not as if we're going to whip out our swords and do the job ourselves.
All we have to do is get a lock of Musashi's hair or something off the body.
There's nothing so hard about that."
      "Have it your way! No use fighting with each other like this. Let's go."
      As they started walking again, Matahachi resumed his disgruntled
soliloquy. "The whole thing's stupid. We take a lock of hair back to the village
and offer it as proof that our great mission in life had been accomplished. Those
bumpkins have never been out of the mountains, so they'll be impressed. Oh,
how I hate that village!"

        Not only had he not lost his fondness for the good sake of Nada, the pretty
girls of Kyoto and a number of other things, he still believed the city was where
he would get his lucky break. Who could deny that one morning he mightn't
wake up with everything he'd ever wanted? "I'll never go back to that piddling
village," he vowed silently.
        Osugi, again lagging a good distance behind, cast dignity to the winds.
"Matahachi," she wheedled, "carry me on your back, won't you? Please. Just for
a short while?"
        He frowned, said nothing, but stopped to let her catch up. Just as she
reached him, their ears were assaulted by the shriek of terror that had jolted Otsū
and Jōtarō. Faces blankly curious, they stood still, listening keenly. A moment
later, Osugi uttered a cry of dismay, as Matahachi ran abruptly to the edge of the
cliff.
        "Wh-where are you going?"
        "It must be down there!" he said, and disappeared over the edge of the
cliff. "Stay there. I'll see who it is."
        Osugi recovered in no time. "Fool!" she shouted. "Where are you going?"
"You deaf? Didn't you hear that scream?"
       "What's that got to do with you? Come back! Come back here!"
       Ignoring her, he rapidly made his way from tree root to tree root to the
       bottom of the little ravine.
       "Fool! Numskull!" she cried. She might as well have been barking at the
       moon.
        Matahachi again shouted to her to stay where she was, but he was so far
down that Osugi barely heard him. "Now what?" he thought, beginning to regret
his impulsiveness. If he was wrong about where the cry had come from, he was
wasting time and energy.
        Though no moonlight penetrated the foliage, his eyes gradually became
accustomed to the dark. He came upon one of the many shortcuts crisscrossing
the mountains east of Kyoto and leading to Sakamoto and Ōtsu. Walking
alongside a brook with tiny waterfalls and rapids, he found a hut, probably a
shelter for men who came to spear mountain trout. It was too small to hold more
than one person, and obviously empty, but behind it he spotted a crouching
figure, face and hands starkly white.
        "It's a woman," he thought with satisfaction, and concealed himself behind
a large rock.
        After a couple of minutes, the woman crept from behind the hut, went to

the edge of the stream and scooped up some water to drink. He took a step
forward. As though warned by animal instinct, the girl looked around furtively
and started to flee.
       "Akemi!"
       "Oh, you frightened me!" But there was relief in her voice. She swallowed
the water that had caught in her throat and heaved a deep sigh.
       After eyeing her up and down, Matahachi asked, "What happened? What
are you doing here at this hour of the night dressed in traveling clothes?"
"Where's your mother?"
      "She's up there." He waved his arm.
      "I bet she's furious."
      "About the money?"
       "Yes. I'm really sorry, Matahachi. I had to leave in a hurry, and I didn't
have enough to pay my bill, and nothing to travel on. I know it was wrong, but I
panicked. Please forgive me! Don't make me go back! I promise I'll return the
money someday." She melted into tears.
       "Why all the apologies? Oh, I see. You think we came up here to catch
you!"
       "Oh, I don't blame you. Even if it was just a wild impulse, I did run away
with the money. If I'm caught and treated like a thief, I guess I can't really
complain."
       "That's the way Mother would look at it, but I'm not like that. Anyway, it
wasn't very much. If you really needed it, I'd have been glad to give it to you. I'm
not angry. I'm much more interested in why you left so suddenly and what you're
doing up here."
      "I overheard you and your mother talking tonight."
      "Oh? About Musashi?"
      "Uh, yes."
      "And you decided all of a sudden to go to Ichijōji?"
      She didn't answer.
       "Oh, I forgot!" he exclaimed, recalling his purpose in coming down into
the ravine. "Were you the one who screamed a few minutes ago?"
       She nodded, then quickly stole a frightened glance at the slope above
them. Satisfied that nothing was there, she told him how she had crossed the
stream and was climbing a steep crag when she looked up and saw an incredibly
evil-looking ghost sitting on a high rock, staring at the moon. It had the body of
a midget, but the face, that of a woman, was an eerie color, whiter than white,

with a mouth that slashed up on one side to the ear. It seemed to be laughing
grotesquely at her and had frightened her out of her wits. Before she came to her
senses, she had already slid back down into the ravine.
       Though the tale sounded absurd, she told it with deadly seriousness.
Matahachi tried to listen politely, but was soon overcome with laughter.
       "Ha, ha! You're making it all up! You probably frightened the ghost. Why,
you used to roam the battlefields and didn't even wait for the dead spirits to leave
before you started stripping the corpses."
       "I was only a child then. I didn't know enough to be afraid."
       "You weren't all that young.... I gather you're still pining over Musashi."
"No.... He was my first love, but—"
       "Then why go to Ichijōji?"
       "I don't really know myself. I just thought that if I went, I might see him."
"You're wasting your time," he said emphatically, then told her Musashi didn't
have a chance in a thousand of coming out of the battle alive.
       After what had happened to her at the hands of Seijūrō and Kojirō,
thoughts of Musashi could no longer conjure up images of the bliss she had once
imagined sharing with him. Having neither died nor found a life that appealed to
her, she felt like a soul in limbo—a goose separated from the flock and lost. As
he stared at her profile, Matahachi was struck by the similarity between her
situation and his. They had both been cut adrift from their moorings. Something
in her powdered face suggested that she was looking for a companion.
       He put his arm around her, brushed his cheek against hers and whispered,
"Akemi, let's go to Edo."
       "To ... to Edo? You must be joking," she said, but the idea shook her out of
her trance.
       Tightening his hold on her shoulders, he said, "It doesn't necessarily have
to be Edo, but everybody says it's the city of the future. Osaka and Kyoto are old
now. Maybe that's why the shōgun's building a new capital in the east. If we go
there now, there should still be lots of good jobs, even for a couple of stray geese
like you and me. Come on, Akemi, say you'll go." Encouraged by the growing
spark of interest in her face, he went on more fervently.
       "We could have fun, Akemi. We could do the things we want to do. Why
live if you can't do that? We're young. We've got to learn to be bold and clever.
Neither of us will get anywhere acting like weaklings. The more you try to be
good and honest and conscientious, the harder fate kicks you in the teeth and
laughs at you. You end up crying your heart out, and where does that get you?

       "Look, that's the way it's always been for you, isn't it? You've done nothing
but let yourself be devoured by that mother of yours and some brutal men. From
now on, you've got to be the one who eats, rather than the one who gets gobbled
up."
       She was beginning to be swayed. Her mother's teahouse had been a cage
from which they had both fled. Since then the world had shown her nothing but
cruelty. She sensed that Matahachi was stronger and better able to cope with life
than she. After all, he was a man.
       "Will you go?" he asked.
       Even though she knew it was as if the house had burned down and she was
trying to rebuild it with the ashes, it took some effort to shake off her fantasy, the
rapturous daydream in which Musashi was hers and hers alone. But finally she
nodded without speaking.
       "Then it's settled. Let's go, now!"
       "What about your mother?"
       "Oh, her?" He sniffed. He glanced up at the cliff. "If she manages to lay
hands on something to prove that Musashi's dead, she'll go back to the village.
No doubt she'll be mad as a hornet when she finds I'm not around. I can hear her
now, telling everybody how I left her on the mountain to die, the way they used
to throw away old women in some parts of the country. But if I make a success
of myself, that'll make up for everything. Anyway, we've made up our minds.
Let's go!"
      He strode off ahead, but she hung back.
      "Matahachi, not that way!"
      "Why?"
      Y•
      "We'll have to pass that rock again."
       "Ha, ha! And see the midget with a woman's face? Forget it! I'm with you
now. Oh, listen—isn't that my mother calling? Hurry up, before she comes
looking for me. She's a lot worse than a small ghost with a scary face."
