A Man of Parts


       Musashi left the field thinking, "I won." He told himself: "I defeated
Yoshioka Seijūrō, brought down the citadel of the Kyoto Style!"
       But he knew his heart was not in it. His eyes were downcast, and his feet
seemed to sink into the dead leaves. A small bird on the wing, rising, exposing
its underside, reminded him of a fish.
       Looking back, he could see the slender pines on the mound where he had
fought Seijūrō. "I only struck once," he thought. "Maybe it didn't kill him." He
examined his wooden sword to assure himself there was no blood on it.
       This morning, on his way to the appointed place, he had been expecting to
find Seijūrō accompanied by a host of students, who might very well resort to
some underhanded maneuver. He had squarely faced the possibility that he
himself might be killed, and to avoid looking unkempt at the end had carefully
brushed his teeth with salt and washed his hair.
       Seijūrō fell far short of Musashi's preconception. He had asked himself if
this could really be the son of Yoshioka Kempō. He could not perceive in the
urbane and obviously well-bred Seijūrō the leading master of the Kyoto Style.
He was too slender, too subdued, too gentlemanly, to be a great swordsman.
       When the greetings were exchanged, Musashi thought uncomfortably: "I
should never have gotten into this fight."
       His regrets were sincere, because his aim was always to take on opponents
who were better than he. One good look was sufficient; there had been no need
to train for a year just to have this bout. Seijūrō's eyes betrayed a lack of self-
confidence. The necessary fire was absent, not only from his face but from his
whole body.
       "Why did he come here this morning," wondered Musashi, "if he has no
more faith in himself than this?" But Musashi was aware of his opponent's
predicament and sympathized. Seijūrō was in no position to call the fight off,
even if he wanted to. The disciples he'd inherited from his father looked up to
him as their mentor and guide; he had no choice but to go through the motions.
As the two men stood poised for battle, Musashi cast about for an excuse to call
the whole thing off, but the opportunity did not present itself.
       Now that it was all over, Musashi thought: "It's too bad! I wish I hadn't had

to do it." And in his heart he prayed, for Seijūrō's sake, that the wound would
heal quickly.
       But the day's work was done, and it was not the mark of a mature warrior
to stand around moping over the past.
       As he quickened his pace, the startled face of an elderly woman appeared
above a patch of grass. She'd been scratching about on the ground, apparently
looking for something, and the sound of his footsteps brought a gasp to her lips.
Dressed in a light, plain kimono, she would have been almost indistinguishable
from the grass, except for the purple cord holding her cloak in place. Though her
clothing was that of a layman, the kerchief hiding her round head was that of a
nun. She was small of build and genteel in appearance.
       Musashi was as astonished as the woman. Another three or four steps and
he might have trampled on her.
       "What are you looking for?" he asked genially. He glimpsed a string of
coral prayer beads on her arm, just inside her sleeve, and a basket of tender wild
plants in one hand. Her fingers and the beads trembled slightly.
       To put her at her ease, Musashi said easily, "I'm surprised to see the greens
up so early. I guess it's really getting to be spring. Hmm, I see you have some
nice parsley there, and some rape and cottonweed. Did you pick them all
yourself?"
       The old nun dropped the basket and ran, shouting, "Kōetsu! Kōetsu!"
Musashi watched bemused as the little form retreated toward a slight rise in the
otherwise flat field. From behind it rose a wisp of smoke.
       Thinking it would be a shame for her to lose her vegetables after going to
all the trouble of finding them, he picked them up and, basket in hand, started off
after her. After a minute or so, two men came into view.
       They had spread a rug on the sunny southern side of a gentle slope. There
were also various implements used by devotees of the tea cult, including an iron
kettle hanging over a fire and a pitcher of water to one side. Taking the natural
surroundings for their garden, they had made themselves an open-air tea room. It
all looked rather stylish and elegant.
       One of the men seemed to be a servant, while the other's white skin,
smooth complexion and well-composed features brought to mind a large china
doll representing a Kyoto aristocrat. He had a contented paunch; self-assurance
was reflected in his cheeks and in his posture.
       "Kōetsu." The name rang a bell, for there was at this time a very famous
Hon'ami Kōetsu living in Kyoto. It was rumored, with considerable envy, that he

had been granted an annual stipend of one thousand bushels by the very wealthy
Lord Maeda Toshiie of Kaga. As an ordinary townsman, he could have lived
magnificently on this alone, but in addition he enjoyed the special favor of
Tokugawa Ieyasu and was frequently received in the homes of high noblemen.
The greatest warriors of the land, it was said, felt constrained to dismount and
walk by his shop on foot, so as not to give the impression that they were looking
down on him.
       The family name came from their having taken up residence on Hon'ami
Lane, and Kōetsu's business was the cleaning, polishing and appraising of
swords. His family had gained a reputation as early as the fourteenth century and
had flourished during the Ashikaga period. They had later been patronized by
such leading daimyō as Imagawa Yoshimoto, Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi
Hideyoshi.
       Kōetsu was known as a man of many talents. He painted, excelled as a
ceramist and lacquer-maker and was regarded as a connoisseur of art. He himself
considered calligraphy to be his forte; in this field he was generally ranked with
acknowledged experts like Shōkadō Shōjō, Karasumaru Mitsuhiro and Konoe
Nobutada, the creator of the famous Sammyakuin Style, which was so popular
these days.
       Despite his fame, Kōetsu felt that he was not fully appreciated, or so it
would seem from a story that was going around. According to this tale, he often
visited the mansion of his friend Konoe Nobutada, who was not only a nobleman
but currently Minister of the Left in the Emperor's government. During one of
these visits, the story went, the talk turned naturally to calligraphy and Nobutada
asked, "Kōetsu, who would you select as the three greatest calligraphers in the
country?"
      Without the slightest hesitation, Kōetsu answered, "The second is yourself,
      and then I suppose Shōkadō Shōjō."
      A little puzzled, Nobutada asked, "You start with the second best, but who
      is the best?"
      Kōetsu, without so much as a smile, looked directly into his eyes and
      replied, "I am, of course."
      Lost in thought, Musashi stopped a short distance from the group.
       Kōetsu was holding a brush in his hand, and on his knees were several
sheets of paper. He was studiously sketching the flow of water in a stream close
by. This drawing, as well as earlier efforts lying scattered about on the ground,
consisted solely of watery lines of a sort that, to Musashi's eye, any novice might

be able to draw.
      Looking up, Kōetsu said quietly, "Is something wrong?" Then, with steady
eyes, he took in the scene: Musashi on one side and on the other his mother
trembling behind the servant.
      Musashi felt calmer in the presence of this man. He was clearly not the
sort of person he came into contact with every day, but somehow he found him
appealing. His eyes held a profound light. After a moment they began to smile at
Musashi, as if he were an old acquaintance.
      "Welcome, young man. Has my mother done something wrong? I'm forty-
eight myself, so you can imagine how old she is. She's very healthy, but there are
times when she complains about her eyesight. If she's done anything she
shouldn't, I hope you'll accept my apologies." Placing his brush and pad on the
small rug he was sitting on, he started to put his hands on the ground and make a
deep bow.
      Hurriedly dropping to his knees, Musashi stopped Kōetsu from bowing.
"Then you're her son?" he asked in confusion.
      "Yes."
      "It is I who must apologize. I don't really know what made your mother
afraid, but as soon as she saw me, she dropped her basket and ran off. Seeing
she'd spilled her greens made me feel guilty. I've brought the things she dropped.
That's all. There's no need for you to bow."
      Laughing pleasantly, Kōetsu turned to the nun and said, "Did you hear
that, Mother? You had the wrong impression entirely."
      Immensely relieved, she ventured out from her place of refuge behind the
servant. "Do you mean the rōnin didn't intend to harm me?"
      "Harm? No, not at all. See, he's even brought back your basket. Wasn't that
considerate of him?"
      "Oh, I'm sorry," said the nun, bowing deeply, her forehead touching the
prayer beads on her wrist. Quite cheerful now, she laughed as she turned to her
son. "I'm ashamed to admit it," she said, "but when I first saw the young man, I
thought I detected the smell of blood. Oh, it was frightening! I broke out in
goose pimples. Now I see how foolish I was."
      The old woman's insight amazed Musashi. She had seen right through him
and without really knowing, had put it very candidly. To this woman's delicate
senses, he must indeed have seemed a terrifying, gory apparition.
      Kōetsu, too, must have taken in his intense, penetrating look, his menacing
mane of hair, that prickly, dangerous element that said he was ready to strike at

the slightest provocation. Still, Kōetsu seemed inclined to search out the good in
him.
       "If you're in no hurry," he said, "stay and rest awhile. It's so quiet and
peaceful here. Just sitting silently in these surroundings, I feel clean and fresh."
       "If I pick a few more greens, I can make some nice gruel for you," said the
nun. "And some tea. Or don't you like tea?"
       In the company of mother and son, Musashi felt at peace with the world.
He sheathed his bellicose spirit, like a cat retracting its claws. In this pleasant
atmosphere, it was hard to believe he was among perfect strangers. Before he
realized it, he had removed his straw sandals and taken a seat on the rug.
       Taking the liberty of asking some questions, he learned that the mother,
whose religious name was Myōshū, had been a good and faithful wife before
becoming a nun, and that her son was indeed the celebrated aesthete and
craftsman. Among swordsmen, there was not one worth his salt who did not
know the name Hon'ami—such was the family's reputation for sound judgment
with regard to swords.
       Musashi found it difficult to associate Kōetsu and his mother with the
picture he had of how such famous people should look. To him they were simply
ordinary people he had met by accident in a deserted field. This was the way he
wanted it to be, for otherwise he himself might grow tense and spoil their picnic.
       Bringing the kettle for the tea, Myōshū asked her son, "How old do you
suppose this lad is?"
       With a glance at Musashi, he replied, "Twenty-five or -six, I imagine."
Musashi shook his head. "No, I'm only twenty-three."
       "Only twenty-three," exclaimed Myōshū. She then proceeded to ask the
usual questions: where his home was, whether his parents were still alive, who
had taught him swordsmanship, and so on.
       She addressed him gently, as though he were her grandson, and this
brought out the boy in Musashi. His manner of speech slipped into the youthful
and informal. Accustomed as he was to discipline and rigorous training, to
spending all his time forging himself into a fine steel blade, he knew nothing of
the more civilized side of life. As the old nun talked, warmth spread through his
weather-beaten body.
       Myōshū, Kōetsu, the things on the rug, even the tea bowl, subtly fused into
the atmosphere and became part of nature. But Musashi was impatient, his body
too restless, to sit still for long. It was pleasant enough while they were chatting,
but when Myōshū began staring silently at the teakettle and Kōetsu turned his

back to continue his sketching, Musashi became bored. "What," he asked
himself, "do they find so entertaining about coming out here like this? Spring's
only barely begun. It's still cold."
       If they wanted to pick wild greens, why not wait until it was warmer and
more people were around? There would be lots of flowers and fresh green plants
then. And if they wanted to enjoy a tea ceremony, why go to the trouble of
lugging the kettle and tea bowls all the way out here? A well-known, prosperous
family like theirs would surely have an elegant tea room in their house.
       Was it to sketch?
       Staring at Kōetsu's back, he found that by twisting a little to the side he
could see the moving brush. Drawing nothing but the lines of flowing water, the
artist kept his eyes on the narrow brook wending its way through the dry grass.
He concentrated solely on the movement of the water, again and again trying to
capture the flowing motion, but the exact feel seemed to elude him. Undeterred,
he went on drawing the lines over and over.
       "Urn," thought Musashi, "drawing's not as easy as it looks, I guess." His
ennui receding for the moment, he watched Kōetsu's brush strokes with
fascination. Kōetsu, he thought, must feel very much as he himself did when he
faced an enemy swordpoint to swordpoint. At some stage he would rise above
himself and sense that he had become one with nature—no, not "sense," because
all sensation would be obliterated at that moment when his sword cut through his
opponent. That magic instant of transcendence was all.
       "Kōetsu's still looking at the water as an enemy," he mused. "That's why he
can't draw it. He has to become one with it before he'll succeed."
       With nothing to do, he was sliding from boredom into lethargy and this
worried him. He must not let himself go slack, even for a moment. He had to get
away from here.
       "I'm sorry I disturbed you," he said brusquely, and started retying his
sandals.
       "Oh, are you leaving so soon?" asked Myōshū.
       Kōetsu turned around quietly and said, "Can't you stay a little longer?
Mother is going to make the tea now. I gather you're the one who had a bout with
the master of the House of Yoshioka this morning. A little tea after a fight does
you good, or at least that's what Lord Maeda says. Ieyasu, too. Tea is good for
the spirit. I doubt whether there's anything better. In my opinion, action is born
of quiet. Stay and talk. I'll join you."
       So Kōetsu knew about the fight! But maybe that was not so strange; the

Rendaiji wasn't far away, only the next field over. A more interesting question
was why he had said nothing about it so far. Was it simply that he regarded such
matters as belonging to a world different from his own? Musashi took a second
look at mother and son, then sat down again.
       "If you insist," he said.
       "We haven't much to offer, but we enjoy having you with us," said Kōetsu.
He put the cover on his ink box and placed it on his sketches to keep them from
blowing away. In his hands, the lid glittered like fireflies. It seemed to be
sheathed in thick gold, with silver and mother-of-pearl inlay.
       Musashi leaned forward to inspect it. Now that it was resting on the carpet,
it no longer gleamed so brightly. He could see that there was nothing at all gaudy
about it; its beauty was that of the gold-leaf and color paintings in Momoyama
castles, reduced many times in size. There was also a hint of something very
ancient about it, a dull patina suggestive of faded glories. Musashi stared
intently. There was something comforting about the box.
       "I made that myself," said Kōetsu modestly. "Do you like it?"
       "Oh, can you make lacquerware too?"
       Kōetsu merely smiled. As he looked at this youth, who seemed to admire
the artifice of man more than the beauty of nature, he was thinking with
amusement: "After all, he is from the country."
       Musashi, unaware of Kōetsu's lofty attitude, said with great sincerity, "It's
really beautiful." He couldn't take his eyes off the ink box.
       "I said I made it myself, but actually the poem on it is the work of Konoe
Nobutada, so I should say we made it together."
      "Is that the Konoe family the imperial regents come from?"
      "Yes. Nobutada's the son of the former regent."
      "My aunt's husband has served the Konoe family for many years." "What's
      his name?"
      "Matsuo Kaname."
      "Oh, I know Kaname well. I see him whenever I go to the Konoe house,
      and he sometimes comes to visit us."
      "Is that so?"
       "Mother, it's a small world, isn't it? His aunt is the wife of Matsuo
Kaname." "You don't say!" exclaimed Myōshū.
       She moved away from the fire and placed the vessels for tea before them.
There could be no doubt that she was perfectly at home with the tea ceremony.
Her movements were elegant yet natural, her delicate hands graceful. Even at

seventy, she seemed to be the epitome of feminine grace and beauty.
       Musashi, uncomfortably out of his depth, sat politely on his haunches, in
what he hoped was the same fashion as Kōetsu. The tea cake was a plain bun
known as Yodo manjū, but it rested prettily on a green leaf of a variety not found
in the surrounding field. Musashi knew there were set rules of etiquette for
serving the tea, just as there were for using the sword, and as he watched
Myōshū, he admired her mastery of them. Judging her in terms of
swordsmanship, he thought to himself, "She's perfect! She doesn't leave herself
open anywhere." As she whisked the tea, he sensed in her the same unearthly
proficiency that one might observe in a master swordsman poised to strike. "It's
the Way," he thought, "the essence of art. One has to have it to be perfect at
anything."
       He turned his attention to the tea bowl in front of him. This was the first
time he had been served in this fashion, and he had not the slightest notion of
what to do next. The tea bowl surprised him, for it resembled something that
might have been made by a child playing in the mud. Yet seen against the color
of this bowl, the deep green of the foam on the tea was more serene and ethereal
than the sky.
       He looked helplessly at Kōetsu, who had already eaten his tea cake and
was holding his tea bowl lovingly in both hands, as one might fondle a warm
object on a cold night. He drank down the tea in two or three sips.
       "Sir," began Musashi hesitantly, "I'm just an ignorant country boy, and I
don't know the first thing about the tea ceremony. I'm not even certain how to
drink the tea."
       Myōshū chided him gently. "Hush, my dear, it doesn't make any
difference. There shouldn't be anything sophisticated or esoteric about drinking
tea. If you're a country boy, then drink it the way you would in the country."
      "It is really all right?"
      "Of course. Manners are not a matter of rules. They come from the heart.
      It's the same with swordsmanship, isn't it?"
      "When you put it that way, yes."
       "If you become self-conscious about the proper way to drink, you won't
enjoy the tea. When you use a sword, you can't let your body become too tense.
That would break the harmony between the sword and your spirit. Isn't that
right?"
       "Yes, ma'am." Musashi unconsciously bowed his head and waited for the
old nun to continue the lesson.

      She laughed, a little tinkling laugh. "Listen to me! Talking about
swordsmanship, when I know nothing at all about it."
      "I'll drink my tea now," said Musashi with renewed confidence. His legs
were tired from sitting in formal style, so he crossed them in front of him in a
more comfortable position. Swiftly, he emptied the tea bowl and set it down
again. The tea was very bitter. Not even for the sake of politeness could he force
himself to say it was good.
      "Will you have another cup?"
      "No, thank you, that's quite enough."
      What did these people find good about this bitter liquid? Why did they talk
on so seriously about the "simply purity" of its flavor and all that sort of thing?
Though understanding eluded him, he found it impossible to regard his host with
anything but admiration. After all, he reflected, there must be more to tea than he
himself had detected; otherwise it could not have become the focal point for a
whole philosophy of aesthetics and life. Nor would great men like Hideyoshi and
Ieyasu have displayed such interest in it.
      Yagyū Sekishūsai, he recalled, was devoting his old age to the Way of Tea,
and Takuan also had spoken of its virtues. Looking down at the tea bowl and the
cloth beneath it, he suddenly envisioned the white peony from Sekishūsai's
garden and felt again the thrill it had given him. Now, inexplicably, the tea bowl
struck him in the same forceful way. He wondered for a moment if he had
gasped out loud.
      He reached out, picked up the bowl lovingly and placed it on his knee. His
eyes shone as he examined it; he felt an excitement he had never experienced
before. As he studied the bottom of the vessel and the traces of the potter's
spatula, he realized that the lines had the same keenness as Sekishūsai's slicing
of the peony stem. This unpretentious bowl, too, had been made by a genius. It
revealed the touch of the spirit, the mysterious insight.
      He could hardly breathe. Why, he knew not, but he sensed the strength of
the master craftsman. It came to him silently but unmistakably, for he was far
more sensitive to the latent force that resided here than most people would have
been. He rubbed the bowl, unwilling to lose physical contact with it.
      "Kōetsu," he said, "I don't know any more about the utensils than I know
about tea, but I would guess that this vessel was made by a very skillful potter."
      "Why do you say that?" The artist's words were as gentle as his face, with
its sympathetic eyes and well-formed mouth. The corners of his eyes turned
down a bit, giving him an air of gravity, but there were teasing wrinkles around

the edges.
      "I don't know how to explain it, but I feel it."
      "Exactly what do you feel? Tell me."
      Musashi thought for a moment and said, "Well, I can't express it very
clearly, but there's something superhuman about this sharp cut in the clay...."
      "Hmm." Kōetsu had the attitude of the true artist. He did not suppose for a
moment that other people knew much about his own art, and was reasonably
certain Musashi was no exception. His lips tightened. "What about the cut,
Musashi?"
     "It's extremely clean."
     "Is that all?"
     "No, no ... it's more complicated than that. There's something big and daring
     about the man who made this."
     "Anything else?"
      "The potter himself was as sharp as a sword from Sagami. Yet he
enveloped the whole thing in beauty. This tea bowl looks very simple, but there's
a certain haughtiness about it, something regal and arrogant, as though he didn't
regard other people as being quite human."
      "Mm."
      "As a person, the man who made this would be difficult to fathom, I think.
But whoever he is, I'd bet he's famous. Won't you tell me who it was?" Kōetsu's
heavy lips broke into a laugh. "His name is Kōetsu. But this is just something I
made for fun."
      Musashi, not knowing he had been undergoing a test, was genuinely
surprised and impressed to hear that Kōetsu was able to make his own ceramics.
What affected him more than the man's artistic versatility, however, was the
human profundity concealed within this ostensibly plain tea bowl. It disturbed
him a little to recognize the depth of Kōetsu's spiritual resources. Accustomed to
measuring men in terms of their swordsmanship, he suddenly decided that his
yardstick was too short. The thought humbled him; here was yet another man
before whom he must admit defeat. For all his splendid victory of the morning,
he was now no more than a bashful youth.
      "You like ceramics too, don't you?" Kōetsu said. "You seem to have a good
eye for pottery."
      "I doubt whether that's true," Musashi replied modestly. "I was only saying
what came into my head. Please forgive me if I said something foolish."
      "Well, of course, you couldn't be expected to know a great deal about the

subject, because to make a single good tea bowl involves a lifetime of
experience. But you do have a feeling for aesthetics, a rather firm instinctive
grasp. I suppose studying swordsmanship has developed your eye to a slight
extent." There seemed to be something close to admiration in Kōetsu's remark,
but as an older man, he could not bring himself to praise the boy. Not only would
it not be dignified, it might also go to his head.
       Presently, the servant returned with more wild greens, and Myōshū
prepared the gruel. As she took it up on small plates, which also appeared to
have been made by Kōetsu, a jar of fragrant sake was heated, and the picnic feast
began.
       The tea ceremony food was too light and delicate for Musashi's taste. His
constitution craved more body and stronger flavor. Yet he made a dutiful attempt
to savor the thin aroma of the leafy mixture, for he acknowledged that there was
much he could learn from Kōetsu and his charming mother.
       As the time passed, he began to look nervously about the field. Eventually,
he turned to his host and said, "It's been very pleasant, but I should go now. I'd
like to stay, but I'm afraid my opponent's men might come and cause trouble. I
don't want to involve you in anything like that. I hope I'll have the opportunity to
see you again."
       Myōshū, rising to see him off, said, "If you're ever in the vicinity of
Hon'ami Lane, don't fail to stop in to see us."
       "Yes, please come and visit us. We can have a nice long talk," Kōetsu
added.
       Despite Musashi's fears, there was no sign of the Yoshioka students.
Having taken his leave, he paused to look back at his two new friends on their
rug. Yes, theirs was a world apart from his. His own long, narrow road would
never lead him to Kōetsu's sphere of peaceful pleasures. He walked silently
toward the edge of the field, his head bowed in thought.
