Too Many Kojirōs




       In the little drinking shop on the city's outskirts, the smell of burning wood
and boiling food filled the air. It was only a shack—floorless, with a plank for a
table and a few stools scattered about. Outside, the last glow of sunset made it
seem that some distant building was on fire, and crows circling the Tōji pagoda
looked like black ashes rising from the flames.
       Three or four shopkeepers and an itinerant monk sat at the makeshift table,
while in a corner several workmen gambled for drinks. The top they spun was a
copper coin with a stick stuck through the hole in the middle.
       "Yoshioka Seijūrō's really got himself in a mess this time!" said one of the
shopkeepers. "And I, for one, couldn't be happier! A toast!"
       "I'll drink to that," said another man.
       "More sake!" another called to the proprietor.
       The shopkeepers drank at a steady, fast pace. Gradually, only a faint light
outlined the shop's curtain, and one of them bellowed, "I can't see whether I'm
raising my cup to my nose or my mouth, it's so dark in here. How about some
light!"
       "Hold on a minute. I'm taking care of it," the proprietor said wearily.
Flames were soon shooting from the open earthenware oven. The darker it grew
outside, the redder were the rays from the fire.
       "I get mad every time I think of it," said the first man. "The money those
people owed me for fish and charcoal! It came to quite a bit, I can tell you. Just
look at the size of the school! I swore I'd get it at year end, so what happened
when I got down there? Those Yoshioka bullies were blocking the entrance,
blustering and threatening everybody. The nerve, throwing every bill collector
out, honest shopkeepers who'd been giving them credit for years!"
       "No use crying about it now. What's done is done. Besides, after that fight
at the Rendaiji, they're the ones with reason to cry, not us."
       "Oh, I'm not mad anymore. They got what was coming to them."
"Imagine, Seijūrō going down with hardly a fight!"
       "Did you see it?"
       "No, but I heard about it from someone who did. Musashi knocked him
down with a single blow. And with a wooden sword, too. Crippled for life, he is.

       "What'll become of the school?"
       "It doesn't look good. The students are out for Musashi's blood. If they
don't kill him, they'll lose face completely. The Yoshioka name will have to
come down. And Musashi's so strong, everyone figures the only person who
might be able to beat him is Denshichirō, the younger brother. They're looking
all over for him."
       "I didn't know there was a younger brother."
       "Hardly anyone did, but he's the better swordsman, according to what I
heard. He's the black sheep of the family. Never shows his face at the school
unless he needs money. Spends all his time eating and drinking on his name.
Sponges off people who respected his father."
       "They make quite a pair. How did an outstanding man like Yoshioka
Kempō wind up with two sons like that?"
       "It just goes to show that blood isn't everything!"
       A rōnin was slumped in a stupor next to the oven. He'd been there for quite
a while and the proprietor had left him alone, but now he roused him. "Sir,
please move back a little," he said as he put more kindling on the fire. "The fire
might burn your kimono."
       Matahachi's sake-reddened eyes opened slowly. "Mm, mm. I know, 1
know. Just leave me alone."
       This sake shop wasn't the only place where Matahachi had heard about the
bout at the Rendaiji. It was on everyone's tongue, and the more famous Musashi
became, the more wretched his wayward friend felt.
      "Hey, bring me another," he called. "You don't have to heat it; just pour it in
      my cup."
      "Are you all right, sir? Your face is awful pale."
      "What's that to you! It's my face, isn't it?"
      He leaned against the wall again and folded his arms.
       "I'll show them one of these days." he thought. "Swordsmanship's not the
only road to success. Whether you get there by being rich, or having a title, or
becoming a gangster, so long as you get to the top you're all right. Musashi and I
are both twenty-three. Not many of these fellows who make names for
themselves at that age end up amounting to much. By the time they're thirty,
they're old and tottering—'aging child prodigies.' "
       Word of the duel at the Rendaiji had spread to Osaka, bringing Matahachi
immediately to Kyoto. Though he had no clear purpose in mind, Musashi's
triumph weighed so heavily on his spirit that he had to see for himself what the

situation was. "He's riding high now," thought Matahachi antagonistically, "but
he's due for a fall. There are plenty of good men at the Yoshioka School—the
Ten Swordsmen, Denshichirō, lots of others...." He could hardly wait for the day
Musashi would receive his comeuppance. In the meantime, his own luck was
bound to change.
       "Oh, I'm thirsty!" he said aloud. By sliding his back up the wall, he
managed to stand. All eyes watched as he bent over a water barrel in the corner,
almost dunking his head, and drank several giant gulps from a dipper. Flinging
the dipper aside, he pushed back the shop curtain and staggered out.
       The proprietor soon recovered from his gaping surprise and ran after the
wobbly figure. "Sir, you haven't paid yet!" he called.
     "What's that?" Matahachi was barely articulate.
     "I think you've forgotten something, sir."
     "I didn't forget anything."
     "I mean the money for your sake. Ha, ha!"
     "Is that so?"
     "Sorry to bother you."
     "I don't have any money."
     "No money?"
     "Yeah, I don't have any at all. I did until a few days ago, but—"
     "You mean you were sitting there drinking— Why, you . .. you ..."
       "Shut up!" After fishing around in his kimono, Matahachi came up with
the dead samurai's pillbox, which he flung at the man. "Stop kicking up such a
fuss! I'm a samurai with two swords. You see that, don't you? I haven't sunk low
enough to sneak away without paying. That thing's worth more than the sake I
had. You can keep the change!"
       The pillbox struck the man squarely in the face. He squealed with pain and
covered his eyes with his hands. The other customers, who had stuck their heads
through slits in the shop curtain, shouted in indignation. Like many a drunk, they
were indignant at seeing another of their kind welsh on his bill.
     "The bastard!"
     "Rotten cheat!"
     "Let's teach him a lesson!"
     They ran out and surrounded Matahachi.
     "Bastard! Pay up! You're not going to get away with this."
     "Crook! You probably pull the same stunt all the time. If you can't pay, we'll
     hang you by the neck!"

      Matahachi put his hand to his sword to scare them off.
      "You think you can?" he snarled. "That should be fun. Just try it! Do you
      know who I am?"
       "We know what you are—a filthy rōnin from the garbage heap, with less
pride than a beggar and more gall than a thief!"
       "You're asking for it!" cried Matahachi, glaring and knitting his brow
fiercely. "You'd sing a different tune if you knew my name."
      "Your name? What's so special about it?"
      "I am Sasaki Kojirō, fellow student of Itō Ittōsai, swordsman of the Chūjō
      Style. You must have heard of me!"
      "Don't make me laugh! Never mind the fancy names; just pay up."
       One man stretched out his hand to grab at Matahachi, who cried, "If the
pillbox isn't enough, I'll give you a bit of my sword too!" Quickly drawing the
weapon, he struck at the man's hand, cutting it clean off.
       The others, seeing that they had underestimated their adversary, reacted as
if it were their blood that had been spilled. They sprinted off into the darkness.
       A look of triumph on his face, Matahachi challenged them anyway. "Come
back, you vermin! I'll show you how Kojirō uses his sword when he's serious.
Come on, I'll take your heads off for you."


       He looked up at the heavens and giggled, his white teeth gleaming in the
darkness as he exulted over his success. Then abruptly his mood changed. His
face wrapped in sadness, he seemed on the verge of tears. Ramming his sword
clumsily back into its scabbard, he started walking unsteadily away.
       The pillbox on the ground sparkled under the stars. Made of black
sandalwood, with a shell inlay, it didn't look very valuable, but a glint of the blue
nacre gave it the subtle beauty of a tiny cluster of fireflies.
       Coming out of the shack, the itinerant monk saw the pillbox and picked it
up. He started to walk on but then went back and stood under the shop's eaves. In
the dim light from a crack in the wall, he examined the design and the cord
carefully. "Hmm," he thought. "This is definitely the master's. He must have had
it with him when he was killed at Fushimi Castle. Yes, here's his name, Tenki,
written on the bottom."
       The monk hurried off after Matahachi. "Sasaki!" he called. "Sasaki
Kojirō!"
       Matahachi heard the name, but in his befuddled condition, failed this time

to connect it with himself. He stumbled on from Kujō Avenue up Horikawa
Street.
       The monk caught up with him and took hold of the end of his scabbard.
"Wait, Kojirō," he said. "Wait just a moment."
       "Eh?" Matahachi hiccupped. "Do you mean me?"
       "You're Sasaki Kojirō, aren't you?" A severe light shone in the monk's
eyes. Matahachi became slightly more sober. "Yes, I'm Kojirō. What's that got to
do with you?"
      "I want to ask you a question."
      "Well, what is it?"
      "Just where did you get this pillbox?"
      "Pillbox?" he asked vacantly.
       "Yes. Where did you get it? That's all I want to know. How did it come
into your possession?" The monk spoke rather formally. He was still young,
perhaps twenty-six or so, and did not appear to be one of the spiritless beggar
monks who wandered from temple to temple living on charity. In one hand he
had a round oak staff, more than six feet long.
       "Who are you anyway?" demanded Matahachi, concern beginning to show
on his face.
       "That doesn't matter. Why don't you just tell me where this came from?"
"It didn't come from anywhere. It's mine, always has been."
      "You're lying! Tell me the truth."
      "I've told you the truth already."
      "You refuse to confess?"
      "Confess to what?" asked Matahachi innocently.
      "You're not Kojirō!" Immediately the staff in the monk's hand split the air.
       Matahachi's instincts pulled him backward, but he was still too groggy to
react quickly. The staff connected, and with a shriek of pain, he staggered back
fifteen or twenty feet before landing on his backside. On his feet again, he took
off.
       The monk gave chase and after a few paces hurled the oak staff. Matahachi
heard it coming and lowered his head. The flying missile sailed past his ear.
Terrified, he doubled his speed.
       When the monk reached the fallen weapon, he seized it, and taking careful
aim, threw it again, but again Matahachi ducked.
       Running at full speed for more than a mile, Matahachi passed Rokujō
Avenue and approached Gojō, finally decided he'd lost his pursuer and stopped.

Rapping his chest, he panted, "That staff—terrible weapon! A man has to be
careful these days."
       Cold sober and burning with thirst, he began searching for a well. He
found one at the far end of a narrow alley. He pulled up the bucket and guzzled
his fill, then put the bucket on the ground and splashed water on his sweaty face.
       "Who can that have been?" he wondered. "And what did he want?" But as
soon as he began to feel normal again, dejection set in. Before his eyes he saw
the agonized chinless face of the corpse at Fushimi.
       That he had used up the dead man's money hurt his conscience, and not for
the first time he thought about atoning for his misdeeds. "When I have money,"
he vowed, "the first thing I'm going to do is pay back what I borrowed. Maybe
after I'm successful, I'll put up a memorial stone to him.
       "The certificate is all that's left. Maybe I should get rid of it. If the wrong
person found out I have it, it might lead to complications." He reached inside his
kimono and touched the scroll, which he always kept tucked in the stomach
wrapper under his obi, though this was rather uncomfortable.
       Even if he couldn't convert it into a vast amount of money, it might lead to
some opening, to that magic first rung on the ladder of success. The unfortunate
experience with Akakabe Yasoma hadn't cured him of dreaming.
       The certificate had already come in handy, for he had found that by
showing it at small, nameless dōjōs or to innocent townspeople with an urge to
learn swordsmanship, he could not only command their respect but receive a free
meal and a place to sleep, without so much as asking. This was the way he had
survived during the past six months.
       "No reason to throw it away. What's wrong with me? I seem to be getting
more and more timid. Maybe that's what keeps me from getting ahead in the
world. From now on, I'm not going to be like that! I'll be big and bold, like
Musashi. I'll show them!"
       He looked around at the shanties surrounding the well. The people living
here struck him as enviable. Their houses sagged under the weight of the mud
and weeds on their roofs, but at least they had shelter. Somewhat abjectly, he
peeped in on some of the families. In one dwelling, he saw a husband and wife
facing each other over the single pot that held their meager dinner. Near them
were a son and daughter, together with their grandmother, doing some
piecework.
       Despite the paucity of worldly goods, there existed a spirit of family unity,
a treasure that even great men like Hideyoshi and Ieyasu lacked. Matahachi

reflected that the more poverty-stricken people were, the stronger their mutual
affection grew. Even the poor could know the joy of being human.
       With a tinge of shame, he recalled the clash of wills that had led him to
stalk angrily away from his own mother at Sumiyoshi. "I shouldn't have done
that to her," he thought. "Whatever her faults, there'll never be anyone else who
loves me the way she does."
       During the week they had been together, going, to his great annoyance,
from shrine to temple and temple to shrine, Osugi had told him time and time
again about the miraculous powers of the Kannon at Kiyomizudera. "No
bodhisattva in the world works greater wonders," she had assured him. "Less
than three weeks after I went there to pray, Kannon led Takezō to me—brought
him right to the temple. I know you don't care much for religion, but you'd better
have faith in that Kannon."
       Now that he thought of it, she had mentioned that after the beginning of
the new year, she planned to go to Kiyomizu and ask Kannon's protection for the
Hon'iden family. There's where he should go! He had no place to sleep tonight;
he could spend the night on the porch, and there was a chance he'd see his
mother again.
       As he headed down dark streets toward Gojō Avenue, he was joined by a
pack of barking stray mongrels, not, unfortunately, of the sort that could be
silenced by throwing a rock or two at them. But he was used to being barked at,
and it didn't bother him when the dogs came up snarling and baring their teeth.
       At Matsubara, a pine woods near Gojō Avenue, he saw another pack of
curs gathered around a tree. The ones escorting him loped off to join them. There
were more than he could count, all raising a great racket, some jumping five and
six feet up the tree trunk.
       Straining his eyes, he could barely make out a girl crouched trembling on a
branch. Or at least he was fairly sure it was a girl.
       He shook his fist and shouted to drive the dogs away. When this had no
effect, he threw rocks, also to no avail. Then he remembered having heard that
the way to scare dogs away was to get down on all fours and roar loudly, so he
tried that. But this did not work either, possibly because there were so many of
them, jumping about like fish in a net, wagging their tails, scratching the bark of
the tree and howling viciously.
       It suddenly occurred to him that a woman might consider it ludicrous for a
young man with two swords to be down on all fours acting like an animal. With
a curse, he jumped to his feet. The next instant, one dog gave a final howl and

died. When the others saw Matahachi's bloody sword hanging above the body,
they drew together, their bony backs heaving up and down like ocean waves.
       "You want more, uh?"
       Sensing the threat of the sword, the dogs scattered in all directions. "You
up there!" he called. "You can come down now."
       He heard a pretty little metallic tinkle among the pine needles. "It's
Akemi!" he gasped. "Akemi, is that you?"
      And it was Akemi's voice that called down, "Who are you?"
      "Matahachi. Can't you tell from my voice?"
      "It couldn't be! Did you say Matahachi?"
      "What are you doing up there? You're not the type to be frightened by
      dogs."
      "I'm not up here because of the dogs."
      "Well, whatever you're hiding from, come down."
       From her perch on the limb, Akemi peered around into the silent darkness.
"Matahachi!" she said urgently. "Get away from here. I think he's come looking
for me."
       "He? Who's he?"
       "There's no time to talk about it. A man. He offered to help me at the end
of last year, but he's a beast. At first I thought he was kind, then he did all sorts
of cruel things to me. Tonight I saw a chance to get away."
      "It's not Okō who's after you?"
      "No, not Mother; it's a man!"
      "Gion Tōji, maybe?"
       "Don't be ridiculous. I'm not afraid of him.... Oh, oh—he's right over there.
If you stay here, he'll find me. He'll do something awful to you too! Hide quick!"
       "Do you expect me to run just because some man has turned up?" He stood
where he was, fidgeting with indecision. He had half a mind to perform a valiant
deed. He was a man. He had a woman in distress on his hands. And he would
have liked to make up for the mortification of having been on his hands and
knees trying to scare the dogs away. The more Akemi urged him to hide, the
more he longed to demonstrate his virility, both to her and to himself.
       "Who's there?"
       The words were spoken simultaneously by Matahachi and Kojirō. Kojirō
glared at Matahachi's sword and the blood dripping from it. "Who are you?" he
demanded belligerently.
       Matahachi remained silent. Having heard the fear in Akemi's voice, he

grew tense. But after a second look, he relaxed. The stranger was tall and well
built, but no older than Matahachi himself. From his boyish hairdo and outfit,
Matahachi took him to be a rank novice, and contempt came into his eyes. The
monk had given him a real scare, but he was sure he could not lose to this young
fop.
       "Could this be the brute who was tormenting Akemi?" he wondered. "He
looks green as a gourd to me. I haven't heard what it's all about yet, but if he's
causing her a lot of trouble, I guess I'll just have to give him a lesson or two."
       "Who are you?" Kojirō asked again. The force of the utterance was such as
to roll away the darkness around them.
       "Me?" Matahachi answered teasingly. "I am merely a human being." He
grinned deliberately.
       The blood rushed to Kojirō's face. "So you have no name," he said. "Or
could it be that you're ashamed of your name?"
       Provoked but unafraid, Matahachi retorted, "I see no need to give my
name to a stranger, who probably wouldn't recognize it anyway."
       Watch how you talk!" snapped Kojirō. "But let's leave the fight between
you and me until later. I'm going to get that girl down from the tree and take her
back where she belongs. You wait here."
       "Don't talk like a fool! What makes you think I'll let you have her?"
"What's it got to do with you?"
       "That girl's mother used to be my wife, and I'm not going to let her be
harmed. If you lay one finger on her, I'll slice you to bits."
       "Now, this is interesting. You seem to fancy yourself to be a samurai,
though I must say I haven't seen such a bony one for many a day. But there's
something you should know. This Drying Pole on my back has been weeping in
its sleep, because not once since it was passed on as a family heirloom has it
gotten its fill of blood. It's getting a little rusty too, so now I think I'll polish it a
bit on that scrawny carcass of yours. And don't try to run away!"
       Matahachi, lacking the sense to see that this was no bluff, said scornfully,
"Stop talking so big! If you want to reconsider, now's the time. Just leave, while
you can still see where you're going. I'll spare your life."
       "The same to you. But listen, my fine human being. You boasted that your
name was too good to mention to the likes of me. Pray, just what is that
illustrious name? It's part of the etiquette of fighting to declare yourself. Or don't
you know that?"
       "I don't mind telling it, but don't be startled when you hear it."

       "I shall steel myself against surprise. But first, what is your style of
swordsmanship?"
       Matahachi figured that no one who prattled on in this fashion could be
much of a swordsman; his estimation of his opponent dropped even lower.
       "I," he informed Kojirō, "hold a certificate in the Chūjō Style, which
branched off from the style of Toda Seigen."
       Kojirō, astonished, tried to hide a gasp.
       Matahachi, believing that he had the advantage, decided it would be
foolish not to press it. Mimicking his questioner, he said, "Now would you tell
me your style? It's part of the etiquette of fighting, you know."
       "Later. Just who did you learn the Chūjō Style from?"
       "From Kanemaki Jisai, of course," Matahachi answered glibly. "Who
else?" "Oh?" exclaimed Kojirō, now really puzzled. "And do you know Itō
Ittōsai?"
       "Naturally." Interpreting Kojirō's questions as proof his story was taking
effect, Matahachi felt sure the young man would soon propose a compromise.
Laying it on a bit thicker, he said, "I supposed there's no reason to hide my
connection with Itō Ittōsai. He was a predecessor of mine. By that, I mean that
we both studied under Kanemaki Jisai. Why do you ask?"
      Kojirō ignored the question. "Then may I ask again, just who are you?" "I
      am Sasaki Kojirō."
      "Say that again!"
      "I am Sasaki Kojirō," Matahachi repeated very politely.
      After a moment of dumbfounded silence, Kojirō uttered a low hum and
      showed his dimples.
      Matahachi glared at him. "Why do you look at me that way? Does my name
      take you by surprise?"
      "I should say it does."
      "All right then—go away!" Matahachi commanded menacingly, raising his
      chin.
       "Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! Oh! Ha, ha, ha!" Kojirō held his stomach to keep from
collapsing with laughter. When he finally brought himself under control, he said,
"I’ve met many people in the course of my travels, but never have I heard
anything to compare with this. Now, Sasaki Kojirō, would you kindly tell me
who I am?"
       "How should I know?"
       "But you must know! I hope I don't seem to be rude, but just to be sure I

heard you right, would you repeat your name one more time?"
      "Haven't you got ears? I'm Sasaki Kojirō."
      "And I am ... ?"
      "Another human being, I suppose."
      "No question about that, but what's my name?"
      "Look, you bastard, are you making fun of me?"
      "No, of course not. I'm quite serious. I've never been more serious in my
      life. Tell me, Kojirō, what's my name?"
      "Why make a nuisance of yourself? You answer the question."
      "All right. I shall ask myself my name, and then, at the risk of seeming
      presumptuous, I shall tell it to you."
      "Good, let's have it."
      "Don't be startled!"
      "Idiot!"
      "I am Sasaki Kojirō, also known as Ganryū."
      "Wh-what?"
        "Since the days of my ancestors, my family has lived in Iwakuni. The
name Kojirō I received from my parents. I am also the person known among
swordsmen as Ganryū. Now, when and how do you suppose it came about that
there are two Sasaki Kojirōs in this world?"
        "Then you ... you're . . ."
        "Yes, and even though a great number of men are traveling about the
countryside, you're the first I've ever encountered with my name. The very first.
Isn't it a strange coincidence that has brought us together?"
      Matahachi was thinking rapidly.
      "What's the matter? You seem to be trembling."
      Matahachi cringed.
      Kojirō came closer, slapped him on the shoulder, and said, "Let's be
      friends."
      Matahachi, face dead white, jerked away and yelped.
      "If you run, I'll kill you." Kojirō's voice thrust like a lance straight into
      Matahachi's face.
        The Drying Pole screaming over Kojirō's shoulder was a silver snake.
Only one strike, no more. In one bound Matahachi covered nearly ten feet. Like
an insect blown from a leaf, he turned three somersaults and stretched out on the
ground unconscious.
        Kojirō did not even look his way. The three-foot sword, still bloodless, slid

back into its scabbard.
       "Akemi!" called Kojirō. "Come down! I won't do that sort of thing
anymore, so come back to the inn with me. Oh, I knocked your friend down, but
I didn't really hurt him. Get down here and take care of him."
       No answer. Seeing nothing among the dark branches, Kojirō climbed up
the tree and found himself alone. Akemi had run away from him again.
       The breeze blew softly through the pine needles. He sat quietly on the
limb, asking himself where his little sparrow could have flown. He simply could
not fathom why she was so afraid of him. Had he not given her his love in the
best way he knew how? He might have been willing to agree that his way of
showing affection was a little rough, but he did not appreciate how different it
was from the way other people made love.
       A clue might be found in his attitude toward swordsmanship. When he had
entered Kanamaki Jisai's school as a child, he had displayed great ability and
was treated as a prodigy. His use of the sword was quite extraordinary. Even
more extraordinary was his tenacity. He absolutely refused to give up. If he faced
a stronger opponent, he clung on all the tighter.
       In this day and age, the manner in which a fighter won was far less
significant than the fact of winning. No one questioned methods very closely,
and Kojirō's proclivity to hang on by hook or crook until he finally conquered
was not considered dirty fighting. Opponents complained of his harassing them
when others would have admitted defeat, but no one considered this unmanly.
       Once when he was still a boy, a group of older students, whom he openly
despised, pummeled him senseless with wooden swords. Taking pity on him, one
of his attackers gave him some water and stayed with him until he revived,
whereupon Kojirō seized his benefactor's wooden sword and beat him to death
with it.
       If he did lose a bout, he never forgot it. He would lie in wait until his
enemy was off guard—in a dark place, asleep in bed, even in the toilet—and
then attack with full force. To defeat Kojirō was to make an implacable enemy.
       As he grew older, he took to speaking of himself as a genius. There was
more than braggadocio in this, both Jisai and Ittōsai having acknowledged the
truth of it. Nor was he making anything up when he claimed to have learned how
to cut down flying sparrows and to have created his own style. This led the
people in the neighborhood to regard him as a "wizard," an appraisal with which
he heartily concurred.
       Exactly what form his tenacious will to dominate took when Kojirō was in

love with a woman, no one knew. But there could be no doubt that he would
have his way. He himself, however, saw no connection whatever between his
swordsmanship and his love-making. He couldn't begin to understand why
Akemi disliked him, when he loved her so much.
       As he pondered his love problems, he noticed a figure moving about under
the tree, oblivious of his presence.
       "Why, there's a man lying there," said the stranger. He stooped over for a
closer look and exclaimed, "It's that rascal from the sake shop!"
       It was the itinerant monk. Taking the pack off his back, he remarked, "He
doesn't seem to be wounded. And his body's warm." He felt around and found
the cord underneath Matahachi's obi, undid it, and tied Matahachi's hands behind
his back. He then put his knees in the small of Matahachi's back and jerked his
shoulders backward, putting considerable pressure on the solar plexus.
Matahachi came to with a muffled groan. The monk carried him like a sack of
potatoes to a tree and propped him up against the trunk.
       "Stand up!" he said sharply, underscoring the point with a kick. "On your
feet!"
       Matahachi, who had been halfway to hell, began to regain his senses, but
could not quite take in what was going on. Still in a stupor, he dragged himself
into a standing position.
       "That's fine," said the monk. "Just stay that way." He then tied Matahachi's
legs and chest to the tree.
       Matahachi opened his eyes slightly and uttered a cry of astonishment.
       "Now, you phony," said his captor, "you led me quite a chase, but that's all
over." Slowly he began working Matahachi over, slapping his forehead several
times, sending his head thudding against the tree. "Where did you get the
pillbox?" he demanded. "Tell me the truth. Now!"
       Matahachi did not answer.
       "So you think you can brazen it out, uh?" Infuriated, the monk clamped his
thumb and forefinger on Matahachi's nose and shook his head back and forth.
       Matahachi gasped, and since he seemed to be trying to speak, the monk let
go of his nose.
       "I'll talk," said Matahachi desperately. "I'll tell you everything." Tears
streamed from his eyes. "What happened was, last summer . . ." he began, and
then he told the whole story, ending with a plea for mercy. "I can't pay the money
back right now, but I promise, if you don't kill me, I'll work hard and return it
someday. I'll give you a written promise, signed and sealed."

       Confessing was like letting the pus out of a festering wound. Now there
was nothing more to hide, nothing more to fear. Or so he thought.
      "Is that the absolute truth?" asked the monk.
      "Yes." Matahachi bowed his head contritely.
      After a few minutes of silent reflection, the monk drew his short sword and
      pointed it at Matahachi's face.
      Quickly turning his head aside, Matahachi cried, "Are you going to kill
      me?"
      "Yes, I think you'll have to die."
       "I've told you everything in perfect honesty. I've returned the pillbox. I'll
give you the certificate. One of these days I'll pay back the money. I swear I will!
Why do you have to kill me?"
       "I believe you, but my position is difficult. I live in Shimonida in Kōzuke,
and I was a retainer of Kusanagi Tenki. He was the samurai who died at Fushimi
Castle. Though I'm dressed as a monk, I'm actually a samurai. My name is
Ichinomiya Gempachi."
       Matahachi, trying to wriggle free and escape, did not really hear any of
this. "I apologize," he said abjectly. "I know I did the wrong thing, but I didn't
mean to steal anything. I was going to deliver everything to his family. Then,
well, I ran short of money and, well, I knew I shouldn't, but I used his. I'll
apologize all you want, but please don't kill me."
       "I'd rather you didn't apologize," said Gempachi, who seemed to be going
through an emotional struggle of his own. Shaking his head sadly, he continued,
"I've been to Fushimi to investigate. Everything fits in with what you said. Still, I
must take something in the way of consolation back to Tenki's family. I don't
mean money. I need something to show that vengeance has been done. But
there's no villain—no single person killed Tenki. So how can I take them the
head of his murderer?"
       "I ... I ... I didn't kill him. Don't make any mistake about that."
       "I know you didn't. But his family and friends don't know he was mobbed
and murdered by common laborers. That's not the sort of story that would do
him honor, either. I'd hate to have to tell them the truth. So though I feel sorry for
you, I think you'll have to be the culprit. It'd help if you'd consent to my killing
you."
       Straining at his ropes, Matahachi cried, "Let me loose! I don't want to die."
       "That's quite natural, but look at it another way. You couldn't pay for the
sake you drank. That means you don't have the ability to take care of yourself.

Rather than starve or lead a shameful existence in this cruel world, wouldn't it be
better to rest in peace in another? If it's money you're worried about, I have a
little. I'd be glad to send it to your parents as a funeral gift. If you prefer, I could
send it to your ancestral temple as a memorial donation. I assure you it would be
delivered in good order."
        "That's insane. I don't want money; I want to live! ... Help!"
        "I've explained everything carefully. Whether you agree or not, I'm afraid
you'll have to stand in as my master's slayer. Give up, my friend. Consider it an
appointment with destiny." He gripped his sword and stepped back to give
himself room to strike.
       "Gempachi, wait!" called Kojirō.
       Gempachi looked up and shouted, "Who's there?"
       "Sasaki Kojirō."
        Gempachi repeated the name slowly, suspiciously. Was another fake
Kojirō about to descend on him from the sky? Still, the voice was too human to
belong to a ghost. He jumped well away from the tree and raised his sword
straight up in the air.
        "This is absurd," he said, laughing. "It looks like everybody's calling
himself Sasaki Kojirō these days. There's another one down here, looking very
sad. Ah! I'm beginning to understand. You're one of this man's friends, aren't
you?"
        "No, I'm Kojirō. Look, Gempachi, you're ready to cut me in two the
minute I come down from here, aren't you?"
        "Yes. Bring on all the phony Kojirōs you like. I'll take care of every one of
them."
        "That's fair enough. If you cut me down, you'll know I was a fake, but if
you wake up dead, you can be sure I was the real Kojirō. I'm coming down now,
and I warn you, if you don't slice me in midair, the Drying Pole will split you
like a piece of bamboo."
       "Wait. I seem to remember your voice, and if your sword is the famous
       Drying Pole, you must be Kojirō."
       "You believe me now?"
       "Yes, but what are you doing up there?"
       "We'll talk about that later."
        Kojirō passed over Gempachi's upturned face and landed behind him in a
flurry of pine needles. The transformation amazed Gempachi. The Kojirō he
remembered seeing at Jisai's school had been a dark-skinned, gawky boy; his

only job had been drawing water, and in accordance with Jisai's love of
simplicity, he had never worn any but the plainest of clothing.
       Kojirō seated himself at the foot of the tree and motioned to Gempachi to
do likewise. Gempachi then related how Tenki had been mistaken for an Osaka
spy and stoned to death and how the certificate had come into Matahachi's
hands. Though Kojirō was vastly amused to learn how he had acquired a
namesake, he said that there was nothing to be gained by killing a man so
lacking in strength as to impersonate him. There were other ways of punishing
Matahachi. If Gempachi was worried about Tenki's family or reputation, Kojirō
himself would go to Kōzuke and see to it that Gempachi's master was recognized
as a brave and honorable warrior. There was no need to make Matahachi the
scapegoat.
      "Don't you agree, Gempachi?" concluded Kojirō.
      "If you put it that way, I guess so."
      "All right, that's that. I have to leave now, but I think you should go back to
      Kōzuke."
      "I will. I'll go directly."
      "To tell the truth, I'm rather in a hurry. I'm trying to find a girl who left me
      rather suddenly."
      "Aren't you forgetting something?"
      "Not that I know of."
      "What about the certificate?"
      "Oh, that."
       Gempachi reached under Matahachi's kimono and took out the scroll.
Matahachi felt light and unencumbered. Now that it seemed that his life would
be spared, he was glad to be rid of the document.
       "Hmm," said Gempachi. "Come to think of it, maybe this incident tonight
was arranged by the spirits of Jisai and Tenki so that I could recover the
certificate and give it to you."
      "I don't want it," said Kojirō.
      "Why?" asked Gempachi incredulously.
      "I don't need it."
      "I don't understand."
      "I don't have any use for a piece of paper like that."
       "What a thing to say! Don't you feel any gratitude toward your teacher? It
took Jisai years to decide whether to give you the certificate. He didn't make up
his mind until he was on his deathbed. He charged Tenki with delivering it to

you, and look what happened to Tenki. You should be ashamed."
      "What Jisai did was his business. I have ambitions of my own."
      "That's no way to talk."
      "Don't misunderstand me."
      "You'd insult the man who taught you?"
       "Of course not, but not only was I born with greater talents than Jisai; I
intend to go farther than he did. Being an unknown swordsman somewhere off in
the sticks is no aim of mine."
       "Do you really mean that?"
       "Every word of it." Kojirō had no compunction about revealing his
ambitions, outrageous though they were by ordinary standards. "I'm grateful to
Jisai, but being saddled with a certificate from a little-known country school
would do me more harm than good. Itō Ittōsai accepted his, but he didn't carry
on the Chūjō Style. He created a new style. I intend to do the same. My interest
is the Ganryū Style, not the Chūjō Style. One of these days, the name Ganryū
will be very famous. So you see, the document means nothing to me. Take it
back to Kōzuke and ask the temple there to preserve it along with its records of
births and deaths." There was not a trace of modesty or humility in Kojirō's
speech.
       Gempachi stared at him resentfully.
       "Please give my regards to the Kusanagi family," Kojirō said politely.
"One of these days I'll go east and visit them, of that you can be sure." He ended
these words of dismissal with a broad smile.
       To Gempachi, this final display of courtesy smacked of patronization. He
thought seriously of taking Kojirō to task for his ungrateful and disrespectful
attitude toward Jisai, but a moment's consideration told him it would be a waste
of time. Walking over to his pack, he put the certificate in it, said a curt good-bye
and took his leave.
       After he was gone, Kojirō had a good laugh. "My, he was angry, wasn't
he? Ha, ha, ha, ha!" Then he turned to Matahachi. "Now, what have you got to
say for yourself, you worthless fake?"
      Matahachi, of course, had nothing to say.
      "Answer me! You admit that you tried to impersonate me, don't you?"
      "Yes."
      "I know you're called Matahachi, but what's your full name?"
      "Hon'iden Matahachi."
      "Are you a rōnin?"

      "Yes."
       "Take a lesson from me, you spineless ass. You saw me return that
certificate, didn't you? If a man doesn't have enough pride to do a thing like that,
he'll never be able to do anything on his own. But look at you! You use another
man's name, steal his certificate, go about living on his reputation. Could
anything be more despicable? Maybe your experience tonight will teach you a
lesson: a house cat may put on a tiger's skin, but it's still a house cat."
       "I'll be very careful in the future."
       "I'm going to refrain from killing you, but I think I'll leave you here to get
free by yourself, if you can manage." On a sudden impulse, Kojirō slipped the
dagger from his scabbard and began scraping off the bark above Matahachi's
head. The chips tumbled down onto Matahachi's neck. "I need something to
write with," grumbled Kojirō.
       "There's a kit with a brush and ink stone in my obi," said Matahachi
obligingly.
       "Good! I'll just borrow them for a moment."
       Kojirō inked the brush and wrote on the patch of tree trunk from which he
had shaved the bark. Then he backed off and admired his handiwork. "This
man," it said, "is an impostor who, using my name, has gone about the
countryside committing dishonorable deeds. I have caught him, and I leave him
here to be ridiculed by one and all. My name and my sword name, which belong
to me and to no other man, are Sasaki Kojirō, Ganryū."
       "That should do it," said Kojirō contentedly.
       In the black forest, the wind was moaning like the tide. Kojirō left off
thinking about his ambition for the future and returned to his immediate course
of action. His eyes lit up as he bounded off through the trees like a leopard.
