The Urbane Craftsman


       Until his dying day, Musashi's father had never stopped reminding him of
his ancestry. "I may be only a country samurai," he'd say, "but never forget, the
Akamatsu clan was once famous and powerful. It should be a source of strength
and pride to you."
       Since he was in Kyoto, Musashi decided to visit a temple called the
Rakanji, near which the Akamatsus had once had a house. The clan had long
since fallen, but it was just possible he might find at the temple some record of
his ancestors. Even if he didn't, he could burn some incense in their memory.
       Arriving at the Rakan Bridge over the Lower Kogawa, he thought that he
must be near the temple, for it was said to be located a little east of where the
Upper Kogawa became the Lower Kogawa. His inquiries in the neighborhood,
however, drew a complete blank. No one had ever heard of it.
       Returning to the bridge, he stood and gazed at the clear, shallow water
flowing beneath it. Though it wasn't so many years since Munisai's death, it
appeared that the temple had been either moved or destroyed, leaving neither
trace nor memory.
       He watched idly as a whitish eddy formed and disappeared, formed and
disappeared again. Noticing mud dripping from a grassy spot on the left bank, he
concluded that it came from a sword polisher's shop.
       "Musashi!"
       He looked around and saw the old nun Myōshū returning from an errand.
       "How good of you to come," she exclaimed, thinking he was there to pay a
call. "Kōetsu's at home today. He'll be glad to see you." She led him through the
gate of a nearby house and sent a servant to fetch her son.
       After warmly welcoming his guest, Kōetsu said, "At the moment, I'm busy
with an important polishing job, but later we can have a nice long chat."
       It pleased Musashi to see that both mother and son were as friendly and
natural as they had been the first time he met them. He spent the afternoon and
evening chatting with them, and when they urged him to spend the night, he
accepted. The next day, while Kōetsu showed him the workshop and explained
the technique of sword polishing, he begged Musashi to stay on as long as he
wished.

        The house, with its deceptively modest gate, stood on a corner southeast of
the remains of the Jissōin. In the neighborhood were several houses belonging to
Kōetsu's cousins and nephews, or to other men engaged in the same profession;
all the Hon'amis lived and worked here, after the fashion of the large provincial
clans of the past.
        The Hon'amis were descended from a fairly distinguished military family,
and had been retainers to the Ashikaga shōguns. In the present social hierarchy,
the family belonged to the artisan class, but insofar as wealth and prestige were
concerned, Kōetsu might have been taken for a member of the samurai class. He
hobnobbed with high court nobles and had on occasion been invited by
Tokugawa Ieyasu to Fushimi Castle.
        The Hon'amis' position was not unique; most of the wealthy artisans and
merchants of the day—Suminokura Soan, Chaya Shirōjirō and Haiya Shōyū,
among others—were of samurai descent. Under the Ashikaga shōguns, their
ancestors had been assigned work related to manufacture or trade. Success in
these fields led to a gradual severing of connections with the military class, and
as private enterprise became profitable, they were no longer dependent on their
feudal emoluments. Although their social rank was technically lower than that of
the warriors, they were very powerful.
        When it came to business, not only was samurai status more of a hindrance
than a help, there were definite advantages to being a commoner, chief of which
was stability. When fighting erupted, the great merchants were patronized by
both sides. True, they were sometimes forced to furnish military supplies for
little or nothing, but they had come to regard this onus as no more than a fee paid
in lieu of having their property destroyed during wartime.
        During the Ōnin War of the 1460s and '70s, the whole district around the
ruins of the Jissōin had been razed, and even now people planting trees often dug
up rusted fragments of swords or helmets. The Hon'ami residence had been one
of the first built in the vicinity after the war.
        A branch of the Arisugawa flowed through the compound, meandering
first through a quarter acre or so of vegetable garden, then disappearing into a
grove, to emerge again near the well by the front entrance of the main house.
There was a branch flowing off toward the kitchen, another toward the bath, and
still another toward a simple, rustic teahouse, where the clear water was used for
the tea ceremony. The river was the source of water for the workshop, where
swords forged by master craftsmen like Masamune, Muramasa and Osafune
were expertly polished. Since the workshop was sacred to the family, a rope was

suspended over the entranceway in the manner of Shinto shrines.
       Almost before he knew it, four days passed, and Musashi made up his
mind to take his leave. But before he'd had a chance to mention this, Kōetsu said,
"We're not doing much to entertain you, but if you're not bored, please stay as
long as you like. There are some old books and curios in my study. If you'd like
to look them over, feel free to do so. And in a day or two, I'm going to fire some
tea bowls and dishes. You might enjoy watching. You'll find ceramics almost as
interesting as swords. Maybe you could model a piece or two yourself."
       Touched by the graciousness of the invitation and his host's assurance that
no one would take offense if he decided to leave on a moment's notice, Musashi
allowed himself to settle down and enjoy the relaxed atmosphere. He was far
from bored. The study contained books in Chinese and Japanese, scroll paintings
from the Kamakura period, rubbings of calligraphy by ancient Chinese masters
and dozens of other things, any one of which Musashi could happily have pored
over for a day or so. He was particularly attracted by a painting hanging in the
alcove. Called Chestnuts, it was by the Sung master Liang-k'ai. It was small,
about two feet high by two and a half wide, and so old that it was impossible to
tell what sort of paper it was drawn on.
       He sat and gazed at it by the hour. Finally, one day, he remarked to Kōetsu,
"I'm sure no rank amateur could paint the sort of pictures you paint, but I wonder
if maybe even I couldn't draw something as simple as this work."
       "It's the other way around," Kōetsu informed him. "Anybody could learn
to paint as well as I, but there is a degree of profundity and spiritual loftiness in
Liang-k'ai's painting that cannot be acquired merely by studying art."
       "Is that really true?" Musashi asked in surprise. He was assured that it was.
       It showed nothing but a squirrel looking at two fallen chestnuts, one split
open and the other tightly closed, as if it wanted to follow its natural impulse and
eat the chestnuts but hesitated for fear of the thorns. Since the painting was
executed very freely in black ink, Musashi had thought it looked naive. But the
more he looked at it after talking to Kōetsu, the more clearly he saw that the
artist was right.
       One afternoon, Kōetsu came in and said, "Are you staring at Liang-k'ai's
picture again? You seem to have taken a great liking to it. When you leave, roll it
up and take it with you. I'd like you to have it."
       Musashi demurred. "I couldn't possibly accept it. It's bad enough for me to
stay here in your house so long. Why, that must be a family heirloom!"
       "But you do like it, don't you?" The older man smiled indulgently. "You

may have it if you want it. I really don't need it. Pictures should be owned by the
people who really love and appreciate them. I'm sure that's what the artist would
want."
       "If you put it that way, I'm not the one to own a painting like this. To tell
the truth, I've thought several times it'd be nice to have it, but if I did, what
would I do with it? I'm only a wandering swordsman. I never stay in the same
place very long."
       "I suppose it would be a nuisance, carrying a painting around with you
wherever you go. At your age, you probably don't even want a house of your
own, but I think every man should have a place he can regard as home, even if
it's nothing more than a little shack. Without a house, a person gets lonely—feels
lost somehow. Why don't you find some logs and build a cabin in some quiet
corner of the city?"
       "I never thought about it. I'd like to travel to a lot of distant places, go to
the farthest end of Kyushu and see how people live under the foreign influences
in Nagasaki. And I'm eager to see the new capital the shōgun is building in Edo
and the great mountains and rivers in northern Honshu. Maybe I'm just a
vagabond at heart."
       "You're not the only one, by any means. It's only natural, but you should
avoid the temptation of thinking that your dreams can be realized only in some
far-off place. If you think that way, you'll neglect the possibilities in your
immediate surroundings. Most young people do, I fear, and become dissatisfied
with their lives." Kōetsu laughed. "But an idle old man like myself has no
business preaching to the young. Anyway, I didn't come here to talk about that. I
came to invite you out this evening. Have you ever been to the licensed quarter?"
       "The geisha district?"
       "Yes. I've a friend named Haiya Shōyū. Despite his age, he's always up to
some mischief or other. I just received a note inviting me to join him near
Rokujō Avenue this evening, and I wondered if you'd like to come along."
       "No, I don't think so."
       "If you really don't want to, I'll not insist, but I think you'd find it
interesting."
       Myōshū, who had crept in silently and was listening with obvious interest,
put in, "I think you should go, Musashi. It's an opportunity to see something you
haven't seen. Haiya Shōyū's not the kind of man you have to be stiff and formal
with, and I believe you'd enjoy the experience. By all means, go!"
       The old nun went to the chest of drawers and began taking out a kimono

and obi. As a rule, older people were at pains to prevent young men from
frittering away their time and money at geisha houses, but Myōshū seemed as
enthusiastic as if she herself were getting ready to go somewhere.
       "Now let's see, which of these kimonos do you like?" she asked. "Will this
obi do?" Chattering away, she busied herself getting out things for Musashi as if
he were her son. She chose a lacquered pillbox, a decorative short sword and a
brocade wallet, then took some gold coins from the money chest and slipped
them into the wallet.
       "Well," said Musashi, with only a trace of reluctance, "if you insist, I'll go,
but I wouldn't look right in all that finery. I'll just wear this old kimono I have
on. I sleep in it when I'm out in the open. I'm used to it."
       "You'll do no such thing!" Myōshū said sternly. "You yourself may not
mind, but think of the other people. In those nice pretty rooms, you'd look no
better than a dirty old rag. Men go there to have a good time and forget their
troubles. They want to be surrounded by beautiful things. Don't think of it as
dressing up to make yourself look like something you're not. Anyway, these
clothes aren't nearly as fancy as some men wear; they're just clean and neat.
Now, put them on!"
       Musashi complied.
       When he was dressed, Myōshū remarked cheerfully, "There, you look very
handsome."
       As they were about to leave, Kōetsu went to the household Buddhist altar
and lit a candle on it. Both he and his mother were devout members of the
Nichiren sect.
       At the front entrance, Myōshū had laid out two pairs of sandals with new
thongs. While they were putting them on, she whispered with one of the
servants, who was waiting to shut the front gate after them.
       Kōetsu said good-bye to his mother, but she looked up at him quickly and
said, "Wait just a minute." Her face was creased in a worried frown.
       "What's the matter?" he asked.
       "This man tells me three rough-looking samurai were just here and spoke
very rudely. Do you suppose it's anything important?"
       Kōetsu looked questioningly at Musashi.
       "There's no reason to be afraid," Musashi assured him. "They're probably
from the House of Yoshioka. They may attack me, but they don't have anything
against you."
       "One of the workmen said the same sort of thing happened a couple of

days ago. Only one samurai, but he came through the gate without being asked
and looked over the hedge by the teahouse path, toward the part of the house
where you're staying."
       "Then I'm sure it's the Yoshioka men."
       "I think so too," agreed Kōetsu. He turned to the trembling gateman.
"What did they say?"
       "The workmen had all left, and I was about to close the gate when these
three samurai suddenly surrounded me. One of them—he looked mean—took a
letter out of his kimono and ordered me to hand it to the guest staying here."
      "He didn't say 'Musashi'?"
      "Well, later on he did say 'Miyamoto Musashi.' And he said Musashi'd been
      staying here for several days."
      "What did you say?"
       "You said not to tell anyone about Musashi, so I shook my head and said
there was no one here by that name. He got angry and called me a liar, but one of
the others—a somewhat older man, with a smirk on his face—calmed him down
and said they'd find a way to deliver the letter directly. I'm not sure what he
meant, but it sounded like a threat. They went off toward the corner down there."
       "Kōetsu, you walk on a little ahead of me," said Musashi. "I don't want
you to get hurt or become involved in any trouble because of me."
       Kōetsu replied with a laugh, "There's no need to worry about me,
particularly if you're sure they're Yoshioka men. I'm not the least bit afraid of
them. Let's go."
       After they were outside, Kōetsu put his head back through the small door
in the gate and called, "Mother!"
       "Did you forget something?" she asked.
       "No, I was just thinking: if you're worried about me, I could send a
messenger to Shōyū and tell him I can't come this evening."
       "Oh, no. I'm more afraid something might happen to Musashi. But I don't
think he'd come back if you tried to stop him. Go on, and have a good time!"
       Kōetsu caught up with Musashi and as they ambled along the riverbank
said, "Shōyū's house is just down the road, at Ichijō Avenue and Horikawa
Street. He's probably getting ready now, so let's stop in for him. It's right on the
way."
       It was still light, and the walk along the river was pleasant, all the more so
because they were completely at leisure at an hour when everybody else was
busy.

      Musashi remarked, "I've heard Haiya Shōyū's name, but I really don't know
      anything about him."
      "I'd be surprised if you hadn't heard of him. He's a well-known expert at
      composing linked verse."
      "Ah! So he's a poet."
      "He is, but of course he doesn't make his living writing verse. He comes
      from an old Kyoto merchant family."
      "How did he get the name Haiya?"
      "It's the name of his business."
      "What does he sell?"
      "His name means 'ash salesman,' and that's what he sells—ashes." "Ashes?"
       "Yes, they're used in dyeing cloth. It's a big business. He sells to dyers'
guilds all over the country. At the beginning of the Ashikaga period, the ash
trade was controlled by an agent of the shōgun, but later it was turned over to
private wholesalers. There are three big wholesale houses in Kyoto, and Shōyū's
is one of them. He himself doesn't have to work, of course. He's retired and
living a life of ease. Look over there; you can see his house. It's the one with the
stylish gate."
       Musashi nodded as he listened, but his attention was distracted by the feel
of his sleeves. While the right one was waving lightly in the breeze, the left did
not move at all. Slipping his hand in, he drew out an object enough to see what it
was—a well-tanned purple leather thong of the type warriors used to tie up their
sleeves when fighting. "Myōshū," he thought. "Only she could have put it there."
       He looked backed and smiled at the men behind them, who, as he was
already aware, had been trailing along at a discreet distance ever since he and
Kōetsu had turned out of Hon'ami Lane.
       His smile seemed to relieve the three men. They whispered a few words to
each other and began taking longer strides.
       Coming to the Haiya house, Kōetsu sounded the clapper on the gate, and a
servant carrying a broom came to admit them. Kōetsu was through the gate and
in the front garden before he noticed Musashi was not with him. Turning back
toward the gate, he called, "Come in, Musashi. There's nothing to be hesitant
about."
       Having closed in on Musashi, the three samurai had their elbows thrust out
and their hands on their swords. Kōetsu couldn't catch what they said to
Musashi, nor the latter's soft reply.
       Musashi told him not to wait, and Kōetsu answered with an air of complete

calm. "All right, I'll be in the house. Join me as soon as you've finished your
business."
       "We're not here," one of the men said, "to argue about whether you ran
away to hide or not. I'm Otaguro Hyōsuke. I'm one of the Ten Swordsmen of the
House of Yoshioka. I've brought a letter from Seijūrō's younger brother,
Denshichirō." Taking the letter out, he held it up for Musashi to see. "Read it and
give us your answer immediately."
      Opening the letter in an offhand manner, Musashi read it quickly and said,
      "I accept."
      Hyōsuke looked at him suspiciously. "Are you sure?"
      Musashi nodded. "Absolutely sure."
      Musashi's casualness took them off guard.
      "If you don't keep your word, you'll never be able to show your face in
      Kyoto again. We'll see to that!"
       Musashi's stare was accompanied by a slight smile, but he said nothing.
"Are you satisfied with the conditions? There's not much time left to prepare
yourself."
       "I'm quite ready," Musashi answered calmly.
       "Then we'll see you later this evening."
       As Musashi started through the gate, Hyōsuke approached him again and
asked, "Will you be here until the time agreed on?"
       "No. My host is taking me to the licensed quarter near Rokujō Avenue."
       "The licensed quarter?" Hyōsuke was surprised. "Well, I assume you'll be
either here or there. If you're late, I'll send someone for you. I trust you won't try
any tricks."
       Musashi had already turned his back and entered the front garden, a step
that took him into a different world.
       The irregularly shaped, artlessly spaced stepping-stones of the garden path
appeared to have been put there by nature. On either side were moist clumps of
low fernlike bamboo, interspersed with taller bamboo shoots, no thicker than a
writing brush. As he walked on, the roof of the main house came into view, then
the front entrance, a small separate house and a garden bower, each contributing
to the atmosphere of venerable age and long tradition. Around the buildings, tall
pines suggested wealth and comfort.
       He could hear people playing the game of kickball called kemari, a soft
sporadic thump, often heard from behind the walls of the mansions of court
nobles. Hearing it in a merchant's establishment surprised him.

       Once in the house, he was shown into a room looking out onto the garden.
Two servants entered with tea and cakes, one informing them that their host
would be with them shortly. Musashi could tell from the servants' manner that
they were impeccably trained.
       Kōetsu murmured, "It's quite cold, isn't it, now that the sun's gone down?"
He wanted to have the shoji closed but didn't ask because Musashi appeared to
be enjoying the view of the plum blossoms. Kōetsu also turned his eyes toward
the view. "I see there are clouds above Mount Hiei," he remarked. "I'd guess
they're from the north. Aren't you chilly?"
       "No, not especially," answered Musashi honestly, serenely ignorant of
what his companion was hinting at.
       A servant brought a candlestick, and Kōetsu took the opportunity to close
the shoji. Musashi became conscious of the atmosphere within the household,
which was peaceful and genial. Relaxing and listening to the laughing voices
coming from the inner part of the house, he was struck by the complete absence
of ostentation. It was as though the decor and surroundings had deliberately been
made as simply as possible. He could imagine himself in the guest room of a
large farmhouse in the country.
       Haiya Shōyū entered the room and proclaimed, "I'm sorry to have kept you
waiting so long." His voice, open, friendly, youthful, was just the opposite of
Kōetsu's soft drawl. Thin as a crane, he was perhaps ten years older than his
friend, yet far more jovial. When Kōetsu explained who Musashi was, he said,
"Oh, so you're a nephew of Matsuo Kaname? I know him quite well."
       Shōyū's acquaintance with his uncle must have been through the noble
House of Konoe, thought Musashi, beginning to sense the close ties between the
wealthy merchants and the palace courtiers.
       Without further ado, the spry old merchant said, "Let's be on our way. I'd
intended to go while it was still light, so that we could stroll over. But since it's
already dark, I think we should call for palanquins. This young man's coming
with us, I assume."
       Palanquins were summoned, and the three set off, Shōyū and Kōetsu in
front, Musashi behind. It was the first time he had ever ridden in one.
     By the time they reached the Yanagi Riding Grounds, the bearers were
     already puffing white steam.
     "Oh, it's cold," one complained.
     "The wind cuts into you, doesn't it?"
     "And it's supposed to be spring!"

       Their three lanterns swung to and fro, flickering in the wind. Dark clouds
above the city hinted ominously of still worse weather before the night was out.
Beyond the riding field, the lights of the city shone in dazzling splendor.
Musashi had the impression of a great swarm of fireflies glowing cheerfully in
the cold, clear breeze.
       "Musashi!" Kōetsu called from the middle palanquin. "That's where we're
going, over there. It's quite an experience to come upon it suddenly, isn't it?" He
explained that until three years ago the licensed district had been at Nijō Avenue,
near the palace, then the magistrate, Itakura Katsushige, had had it moved,
because the nightly singing and carousing was a nuisance. He said the whole
area was thriving and that all new fashions originated within those rows of
lights.
       "You could almost say that a whole new culture has been created there."
Pausing and listening carefully for a moment, he added, "You can just hear it,
can't you? The sound of strings and singing?"
       It was music Musashi had never heard before.
       "The instruments are shamisen. They're an improved version of a three-
stringed instrument brought from the Ryukyu Islands. A great many new songs
have been composed for them, all right here in the quarter, then spread out
among the common people. So you can see how influential this district is, and
why certain standards of decency have to be maintained, even though it's rather
cut off from the rest of the city."
       They turned into one of the streets; the light from countless bright lamps
and lanterns hanging from the willow trees reflected in Musashi's eyes. The
district had kept its old name when it was moved: Yanagimachi, the Town of
Willows, willows having long been associated with drinking and dalliance.
       Kōetsu and Shōyū were well known at the establishment they entered. The
greetings were obsequious yet jocular, and it soon became apparent that here
they used nicknames—"play names," as it were. Kōetsu was known as
Mizuochi-sama—Mr. Falling Water—because of the streams traversing his
estate, and Shōyū was Funabashi-sama—Mr. Boat Bridge—after a pontoon
bridge in the vicinity of his house.
       If Musashi was to become a habitué, he would certainly acquire a
nickname soon, for in this never-never land, few used their real names.
Hayashiya Yojibei was only the pseudonym of the proprietor of the house they
were visiting, but more often than not he was called Ōgiya, the name of the
establishment. Along with the Kikyōya, it was one of the two best-known houses

in the district, the only two, in fact, with the reputation of being absolutely first
class. The reigning beauty at the Ōgiya was Yoshino Dayū, and her counterpart
at the Kikyōya, Murogimi Dayū. Both ladies enjoyed a degree of fame in the city
rivaled only by that of the greatest daimyō.
       Although Musashi studiously attempted not to gape, he was astonished by
the elegance of his surroundings, which approached that of the most opulent
palaces. The reticular ceilings, ornately carved openwork transoms, exquisite
curved railings, fastidiously tended inner gardens—everything was a feast for
the eye. Absorbed in a painting on a wooden door panel, he did not notice that
his companions had gone on ahead until Kōetsu came back for him.
       The silver-colored doors of the room they entered were transformed into a
hazy liquid by the light of the lamps. One side opened onto a garden in the style
of Kobori Enshū, well-raked sand and a rock arrangement suggestive of Chinese
mountain scenery, such as one might see in a Sung painting.
       Shōyū, complaining of the cold, sat down on a cushion and drew his
shoulders together. Kōetsu also seated himself and bade Musashi to do likewise.
Serving girls soon arrived with warm sake.
       Seeing that the cup he had urged on Musashi had cooled off, Shōyū
became insistent. "Drink up, young man," he said, "and have a hot cup."
       After this refrain had been repeated two or three times, Shōyū's manner
began to border on rudeness. "Kobosatsu!" he said to one of the serving girls.
"Make him drink! You, Musashi! What's the matter with you? Why aren't you
drinking?"
      "I am," protested Musashi.
      The old man was already a little tipsy. "Well, you're not doing very well.
      You don't have any spirit!"
      "I'm not much of a drinker."
      "What you mean is that you're not a strong swordsman, isn't it?"
      "Maybe that's true," said Musashi mildly, laughing off the insult.
       "If you're worried about drinking interfering with your studies, or throwing
you off balance, or weakening your willpower, or preventing you from making a
name for yourself, then you haven't got the pluck to be a fighter." "Oh, it's not
that. There's only one small problem."
       "What might that be?"
       "It makes me sleepy."
       "Well, you can go to sleep here or anywhere else in the place. No one will
mind." Turning to the girls, he said, "The young man's afraid he'll get drowsy if

he drinks. If he gets sleepy, put him to bed!"
     "Oh, we'll be glad to!" chorused the girls, smiling coyly.
     "If he goes to bed, someone will have to keep him warm. Kōetsu, which
     one should it be?"
     "Which one indeed?" said Kōetsu noncommittally.
       "It can't be Sumigiku Dayū; she's my little wife. And you yourself
wouldn't want it to be Kobosatsu Dayū. There's Karakoto Dayū. Um, she won't
do. She's too hard to get along with."
       "Isn't Yoshino Dayū going to put in an appearance?" asked Kōetsu.
       "That's it! She's just the one! Even our reluctant guest should be happy
with her. I wonder why she isn't here now. Someone go call her. I want to show
her to the young samurai here."
       Sumigiku objected. "Yoshino's not like the rest of us. She has many
clients, and she won't come running at just anyone's beck and call."
       "Oh, yes she will—for me! Tell her I'm here, and she'll come, no matter
who she happens to be with. Go and call her!" Shōyū reared up, looked around
and called to the young girls who attended the courtesans and were now playing
in the next room: "Is Rin'ya there?"
       Rin'ya herself answered.
       "Come here a minute. You wait on Yoshino Dayū, don't you? Why isn't she
here? Tell her Funabashi is here, she should come right away. If you bring her
back with you, I'll give you a present."
       Rin'ya looked a little puzzled. Her eyes opened wide, but after a moment
she signaled her assent. She already showed signs of becoming a great beauty,
and it was almost certain she would be the successor in the next generation to the
famous Yoshino. But she was only eleven years old. Barely had she gone into the
outside corridor and slid the door shut when she clapped her hands and called
loudly, "Uneme, Tamami, Itonosuke! Look out here!"
       The three girls rushed out and began clapping their hands and shrieking
joyfully, delighted by the discovery of snow outside.
       The men looked out to see what the commotion was about and, except for
Shōyū, were amused by the sight of the young attendants chattering excitedly,
trying to decide whether the snow would still be on the ground in the morning.
Rin'ya, her mission forgotten, rushed out into the garden to play in the snow.
       Impatient, Shōyū sent one of the courtesans in search of Yoshino Dayū.
       She returned and whispered into his ear, "Yoshino said she would like
more than anything to join you, but her guest won't permit it."

       "Won't permit it! That's ridiculous! Other women here may be forced to do
their customers' bidding, but Yoshino can do as she pleases. Or is she allowing
herself to be bought for money these days?"
       "Oh, no. But the guest she's with tonight is particularly stubborn. Every
time she says she'd like to leave, he insists more adamantly that she stay." "Urn. I
suppose none of her customers ever wants her to go. Who is she with tonight?"
      "Lord Karasumaru."
      "Lord Karasumaru?" repeated Shōyū with an ironic smile. "Is he alone?"
      "No."
      "He's with some of his usual cronies?"
      "Yes."
       Shōyū slapped his knee. "This might turn out to be interesting. The snow is
good, the sake is good, and if we just had Yoshino, everything would be perfect.
Kōetsu, let's write his lordship a letter. You, young lady, bring me an ink stone
and brush."
       When the girl placed the writing materials before Kōetsu, he said, "What
shall I write?"
       "A poem would be good. Prose might do, but verse would be better. Lord
Karasumaru is one of our more celebrated poets."
       "I'm not sure I know how to go about it. Let's see, we want the poem to
persuade him to let us have Yoshino, isn't that right?"
       "That's it."
       "If it's not a good poem, it won't make him change his mind. Good poems
are not easy to write on the spur of the moment. Why don't you write the first
lines, and I'll write the rest?"
       "Hmm. Let's see what we can do." Shōyū took the brush and wrote:


           To our humble hut
           Let there come one cherry tree, One tree from Yoshino.


      "So far, so good," said Kōetsu, and wrote:


           The flowers shiver from cold
           In the clouds above the peaks.

       Shōyū was immensely pleased. "Marvelous," he said. "That ought to take
care of his lordship and his noble companions—the 'people above the clouds."'
He neatly folded the paper, then handed it to Sumigiku, saying gravely, "The
other girls don't seem to have the dignity you have, so I appoint you my envoy to
Lord Kangan. If I'm not mistaken, that's the name he's known by in these parts."
The nickname, meaning "Frigid Mountain Crag," was a reference to Lord
Karasumaru's exalted status.
       Sumigiku was not long in returning. "Lord Kangan's reply, if you please,"
she said, reverentially placing a gorgeously wrought letter box before Shōyū and
Kōetsu. They looked at the box, which implied formality, then at each other.
What had started as a little joke was taking on more serious overtones.
       "My word," said Shōyū. "We must be more careful next time. They must
have been surprised. Surely they couldn't have known we'd be here tonight."
       Still hoping to get the better of the exchange, Shōyū opened the box and
unfolded the answer. To his dismay, he saw nothing but a piece of cream-colored
paper, devoid of writing.
      Thinking he must have dropped something, he looked around for a second
      sheet, then glanced again into the box.
      "Sumigiku, what does this mean?"
      "I have no idea. Lord Kangan handed me the box and told me to give it to
      you.
       "Is he trying to make asses of us? Or was our poem too clever for him and
he's raising the white flag of surrender?" Shōyū had a way of interpreting things
to suit his own convenience, but this time he appeared uncertain. He handed the
paper to Kōetsu and asked, "What do you make of it?"
      "I think he intends us to read it."
      "Read a blank piece of paper?"
      "I should think it can be construed somehow."
      "Do you? What could it possibly mean?"
      Kōetsu thought for a moment. "Snow ... snow covering everything." "Hmm.
      Maybe you're right."
      "In answer to our request for a cherry tree from Yoshino, it could mean:


          If you gaze at snow

           And fill your cup with sake,
           Even without flowers . . .


       In other words, he's telling us that since it's snowing tonight, we should
forget about love, open the doors and admire the snow as we drink. Or at least,
that's my impression."
       "How annoying!" exclaimed Shōyū with distaste. "I have no intention of
drinking in such a heartless fashion. Not going to sit here and be silent either.
One way or another, we'll transplant the Yoshino tree to our room and admire her
blossoms." Excited now, he moistened his lips with his tongue.
       Kōetsu humored him, hoping he would calm down, but Shōyū kept after
the girls to bring Yoshino and refused to allow the subject to be changed for very
long. Though his persistence did not secure his wish, it eventually became
comical, and the girls rolled on the floor with laughter.
       Musashi quietly left his seat. He had chosen the right time. No one noticed
his departure.
