Entwining Branches


       "Otsū, I'm back," Jōtarō called as he swept through the rustic front gate.
       Otsū sat just inside the veranda with her arms propped on a low writing
table, staring at the sky as she had been since morning. Under the gable was a
wooden plaque bearing an inscription in white characters: "Hermitage of the
Mountain Moon." The little cottage belonging to a priestly official at the
Ginkakuji had, at Lord Karasumaru's request, been lent to Otsū.
       Jōtarō plopped down in a clump of blossoming violets and began splashing
his feet in the brook to wash off the mud. The water, which flowed directly from
the garden of the Ginkakuji, was purer than fresh snow. "Water's freezing," he
observed with a frown, but the earth was warm and he was happy to be alive and
in this beautiful spot. Swallows sang as if they, too, were pleased with the day.
      He rose, wiped his feet on the grass and walked over to the veranda. "Don't
      you get bored?" he asked.
      "No; I have many things to think about."
      "Wouldn't you like to hear some good news?"
      "What news?"
      "It's about Musashi. I heard he's not so far from here."
      "Where?"
       "I’ve been wandering around for days asking if anyone knew where he
was, and today I heard he's staying at the Mudōji on Mount Hiei."
       "In that case, I suppose he's all right."
       "Probably, but I think we should go there right away, before he goes off
someplace. I'm hungry. Why don't you get ready while I have something to eat?"
       "There are some rice dumplings wrapped in leaves. They're in that three-
tiered box over there. Help yourself."
       When Jōtarō finished the dumplings, Otsū hadn't moved from the table.
"What's the matter?" he asked, eyeing her suspiciously.
       "I don't think we ought to go."
       "Of all the stupid ... One minute you're dying to see Musashi, and the next
you start pretending you don't want to."
       "You don't understand. He knows how I feel. That night when we met on
the mountain, I told him everything, said all there was to say. We thought we'd

never see each other alive again."
        "But you can see him again, so what are you waiting for?"
        "I don't know what he's thinking, whether he's satisfied with his victory or
just staying out of danger. When he left me I resigned myself to never being with
him again in this life. I don't think I should go unless he sends for me."
      "What if he doesn't do that for years?"
      "I'll go on doing what I'm doing right now."
      "Sit there and look at the sky?"
      "You don't understand. But never mind."
      "What don't I understand?"
        "Musashi's feelings. I really feel I can trust him now. I used to love him
heart and soul, but I don't think I believed in him completely. Now I do.
Everything's different.
        "We're closer than the branches of the same tree. Even if we're separated,
even if we die, we'll still be together. So nothing can make me lonely anymore.
Now I only pray he'll find the Way he's searching for."
        Jōtarō exploded. "You're lying!" he shouted. "Can't women even tell the
truth? If you want to act that way, all right, but don't ever mention to me again
how much you long to see Musashi. Cry your eyes out! It's all the same to me."
He'd put a lot of effort into finding out where Musashi had gone from Ichijōji—
and now this! He ignored Otsū and didn't say a word the rest of the day.
        Just after dusk, a reddish torchlight crossed the garden, and one of Lord
Karasurnaru's samurai knocked on the door. He handed a letter to Jōtarō, saying,
"It's from Musashi to Otsū. His lordship said Otsū should take good care of
herself." He turned and left.
        "It's Musashi's handwriting, all right," thought Jōtarō. "He must be alive."
Then, with a trace of indignation: "It's addressed to Otsū, not to me, I see."
      Emerging from the rear of the cottage, Otsū said, "That samurai brought a
      letter from Musashi, didn't he?"
      "Yes, but I don't suppose you'd be interested," he replied with a pout, hiding
      the letter behind his back.
      "Oh, stop it, Jōtarō. Let me see it," Otsū implored.
        He resisted for a time, but at the first hint of tears thrust the envelope at
her. "Ha!" he gloated. "You pretend you don't want to see him, but you can't wait
to read his letter."
        As she crouched by the lamp, the paper trembling in her white fingers, the
flame seemed to have a special gaiety, a portent almost of happiness and good

fortune.
       The ink sparkled like a rainbow, the tears on her eyelashes like jewels.
Otsū, suddenly transported to a world she hadn't dared hope existed, recalled the
ecstatic passage in Po Chü-i's poem where the departed spirit of Yang Kuei-fei
rejoiced over a message of love from her bereaved emperor.
       She read the short message, then again read it. "He must be waiting this
very minute. I must hurry." Though she thought she said the words aloud, she
uttered not a sound.
       Flying into action, she wrote thank-you notes to the owner of the cottage,
to other priests at the Ginkakuji and to all those who had been kind to her during
her stay. She had gathered her belongings together, tied on her sandals and was
out in the garden before she noticed that Jōtarō was still sitting inside nursing his
pique.
      "Come on, Jō! Hurry up!"
      "Going somewhere?"
      "Are you still angry?"
       "Who wouldn't be? You never think of anybody but yourself. Is there
something so secret about Musashi's letter you can't even show it to me?"
       "I'm sorry," she said apologetically. "There's no reason you shouldn't see
it."
       "Forget it. I'm not interested now."
       "Don't be so difficult. I want you to read it. It's a wonderful letter, the first
he's ever sent me. And this is the first time he's asked me to come and join him.
I've never been so happy in my life. Stop pouting, and come with me to Seta.
Please."
       On the road through Shiga Pass, Jōtarō maintained a grumpy silence, but
eventually he plucked a leaf to use as a whistle and hummed a few popular
ditties to relieve the nocturnal stillness.
       Eventually, too, Otsū, prompted to make a peace offering, said, "There are
some sweets left from the box Lord Karasumaru sent the day before yesterday."
      But dawn was breaking and clouds beyond the pass were turning pink
      before he became his normal self again.
      "Are you all right, Otsū? Aren't you tired?"
      "A little. It's been uphill all the way."
      "It'll be easier from now on. Look, you can see the lake."
      "Yes; Lake Biwa. Where's Seta?"
      "Over that way. Musashi wouldn't be there this early, would he?"

      "I really don't know. It'll take us half the day to get there ourselves. Shall we
      take a rest?"
      "Okay," he replied, his good humor restored. "Let's sit down under those
      two big trees over there."
       The smoke of early morning cooking fires rose in strands, like vapors
ascending from a battlefield. Through the mist stretching from the lake to the
town of Ishiyama, the streets of Otsu were becoming visible. As he approached,
Musashi drew his hand across his brow and looked around, glad to be back
among people.
       Near the Miidera, as he started up the Bizōji slope, he had wondered idly
which road Otsū would take. He had imagined earlier he might meet her on the
way but later decided this was unlikely. The woman who had taken his letter to
Kyoto had informed him that though Otsū was no longer at the Karasumaru
residence, his letter would be delivered to her. Since she would have received it
no sooner than late evening and would have had various things to do before
leaving, it seemed probable that she would wait until morning before setting out.
       Passing a temple with a fine stand of old cherry trees—no doubt famous,
he thought, for their spring blossoms—he had noticed a stone monument
standing on a mound. Though he had caught only a glimpse of the poem
inscribed thereon, it came back to him a few hundred yards farther down the
road. It was from the Taiheiki. Recalling that the poem was connected with a tale
he had once memorized, he began reciting it slowly to himself.
       " 'A venerable priest from the temple of Shiga—leaning on a six-foot staff
and so old that his white eyebrows grew together in a frosty peak on his forehead
—was contemplating the beauty of Kannon in the waters of the lake when he
chanced to catch sight of an imperial concubine from Kyōgoku. She was on her
way back from Shiga, where there was a great field of flowers, and when he saw
her, he was overcome with passion. The virtue that he had so arduously
accumulated over the years deserted him. He was engulfed in the burning house
of desire and ...'
       "Now, how did that go? I seem to have forgotten some of it. Ah!
       " ' • • • and he returned to his hut made of sticks and prayed before the
image of the Buddha, but a vision of the woman persisted. Though he called on
the Buddha's name, his own voice sounded like the breath of delusion. In the
clouds above the mountains at twilight, he seemed to see the combs in her hair.
This made him sad. When he raised his eyes to the lonely moon, her face smiled
back at him. He was perplexed and ashamed.

       "'Fearing that such thoughts would prevent him from going to paradise
when he died, he resolved to meet the damsel and reveal his feelings to her. In
this way, he hoped to die a peaceful death.
       "'So he went to the Imperial Palace and, planting his staff firmly in the
ground, stood waiting in the kickball court for an entire day and night—' "
"Pardon me, sir! You, on the cow!"
       The man seemed to be a day laborer of the sort found in the wholesale
district. Coming around in front of the cow, he patted her nose and looked over
her head at the rider.
       "You must have come from the Mudōji," he said.
       "I did, as a matter of fact. How did you know?"
       "I lent this cow to a merchant. I guess he must have left her there. I rent
her out, so I'll have to ask you to pay me for the use of her."
       "I'll be happy to pay. But tell me, how far would you let me take her?"
       "So long as you pay, you can take her anywhere. All you have to do is turn
her over to a wholesaler in the town nearest where you're going. Then somebody
else'll rent her. Sooner or later she'll get back here."
       "How much would it cost me if I took her to Edo?"
       "I'll have to check that at the stable. It's right on your way anyhow. If you
decide to rent her, you just have to leave your name at the office."
       The wholesale district was near the ford at Uchidegahama. Since many
travelers passed through there, Musashi thought it was just the place to freshen
up and buy some things he needed.
       After the arrangements for the cow had been made, he had a leisurely
breakfast and set out for Seta, savoring the prospect of seeing Otsū again. He no
longer had any misgivings about her. Until their meeting on the mountain, she
had always elicited a certain fear in him, but this time it was different: her purity,
intelligence and devotion on that moonlit night had made his confidence in her
deeper than love.
       Not only did he trust her; he knew she trusted him. He had vowed that
once they were together again, he would refuse her nothing—provided, of
course, it did not jeopardize his way of life as a swordsman. What had worried
him before was the dread that if he allowed himself to love her, his sword would
be blunted. Like the old priest in the story, he might lose the Way. That she was
well disciplined was now evident; she would never become a hindrance or a
fetter holding him back. His only problem now was to make sure that he himself
did not drown in the deep pool of love.

        "When we get to Edo," he thought, "I'll see she gets the type of training
and education a woman needs. While she studies, I'll take Jōtarō with me, and
together we'll find a still higher plane of discipline. Then one day, when the time
comes . . ." Light reflected from the lake bathed his face in a gently flickering
glow.
        The two sections of Kara Bridge, one ninety-six column spans and the
other twenty-three column spans, were linked by a small island. On the island
was an ancient willow tree, a landmark for travelers. The bridge itself was often
called Willow Bridge.
        "He's coming!" cried Jōtarō, dashing out of the tea shop onto the shorter
section of the bridge, where he stood beckoning to Musashi with one hand and
pointing to the tea shop with the other. "There he is, Otsū! See? Riding a cow."
He broke into a little dance. Soon Otsū was standing beside him, she waving her
hand, he waving his basket hat. A broad grin lit Musashi's face as he drew near.
        He tied the cow to a willow tree, and the three of them entered the tea
shop. Though Otsū had called wildly to Musashi while he was still on the far
side of the bridge, now that he was beside her, words failed her. Beaming
happily, she left the talking to Jōtarō.
        "Your wound's healed," said the boy, almost rhapsodically. "When I saw
you on the cow, I thought maybe it was because you couldn't walk. But we still
managed to get here first, didn't we? As soon as Otsū got your letter, she was
ready to leave."
        Musashi smiled, nodded, murmured "oh"s and "ah"s, but Jōtarō's talk
about Otsū and her love in front of strangers made him uncomfortable. At his
insistence, they moved to a little porch in back, which was shaded by a wisteria
trellis. Otsū remained too diffident to speak, and Musashi grew taciturn. But
Jōtarō paid no heed; his rapid chatter mingled with the buzzing of bees and the
whir of gadflies.
        He was interrupted by the proprietor's voice, saying, "You'd better come
inside. A storm's brewing. Look how dark the sky's getting above Ishiyamadera."
He bustled about, putting away straw blinds and placing wooden rain shutters
around the sides of the porch. The river had turned gray; gusts of wind set the
lavender wisteria blossoms into wild motion. All at once, a flash of light
streaked through the sky, and the rain came pouring down in great torrents.
        "Lightning!" cried Jōtarō. "The first this year. Hurry up, get inside, Otsū.
You'll get soaked. Hurry, Sensei. Oh, the rain came at just the right time. It's
perfect."

       But if the shower was "perfect" for Jōtarō, it meant embarrassment for
Musashi and Otsū, for going back inside together would make them feel like
starry-eyed lovers. Musashi held back, and Otsū, blushing, stood at the edge of
the porch, no better protected from the elements than the wisteria blossoms.
       The man holding a piece of straw matting over his head as he ran through
the blinding rain looked like a large self-propelled umbrella. Dashing under the
eaves of a shrine gate, he smoothed his wet, rumpled hair and looked up
questioningly at the swiftly moving clouds. "It's just like midsummer," he
grumbled. No sound was audible above the pounding of the rain, but an abrupt
flash of light sent his hands to his ears. Matahachi squatted fearfully near a
statue of the god of thunder, which stood beside the gate.
       As suddenly as it had begun, the rain ceased. The black clouds parted, the
sunshine streamed through, and before long the street had returned to normal.
Somewhere in the distance Matahachi could hear the plinking of shamisen. As
he started to move on, a woman dressed like a geisha crossed the street and
walked directly up to him.
     "Your name's Matahachi, isn't it?" she said.
     "It is," he answered suspiciously. "How did you know?"
     "A friend of yours is at our shop now. He saw you from the window and
     told me to come get you."
       Glancing around, he saw that there were several brothels in the
neighborhood. Though he hesitated, the woman hurried him along toward her
own. "If you have other business," she said, "you don't have to stay long."
       When they entered, the girls virtually fell all over him, wiping off his feet,
removing his wet kimono and insisting that he go to the parlor upstairs. When he
asked who this friend was, they laughed and told him he would find out soon
enough.
       "Well," said Matahachi, "I've been out in the rain, so I'll stay until my
clothes dry, but don't try to keep me here any longer than that. There's a man
waiting for me at the bridge in Seta."
       With much tittering, the women promised him he could leave in good
time, meanwhile almost pushing him up the stairs.
       At the threshold of the parlor, he was greeted by a man's voice. "Well,
well, if it isn't my friend Inugami Sensei!"
       For a moment, Matahachi thought it was a case of mistaken identity, but
when he looked into the room, the face seemed vaguely familiar.
     "Who are you?" he asked.

      "Have you forgotten Sasaki Kojirō?"
      "No," Matahachi replied quickly. "But why do you call me Inugami? My
      name's Hon'iden, Hon'iden Matahachi."
       "I know, but I always remember you as you were that night on Gojō
Avenue, making funny faces at a pack of stray curs. I think Inugami—god of the
dogs—is a good name for you."
       "Cut it out! That's nothing to joke about. I had a terrible time that night,
thanks to you."
       "I don't doubt it. In fact, I sent for you today because I want to do you a
       good turn for a change. Come in, have a seat. Give the man some sake,
girls." "I can't stay. I have to meet someone in Seta. I can't afford to get drunk
       today."
       "Who are you meeting?"
       "A man by the name of Miyamoto. He's a childhood friend of mine, and
—" "Miyamoto Musashi? Did you make an appointment with him when you
were at the inn in the pass?"
       "How did you know?"
       "Oh, I've heard all about you, all about Musashi too. I met your mother—
Osugi, is it?—at the main hall on Mount Hiei. She told me about all the troubles
she's gone through."
       "You talked to my mother?"
       "Yes. She's a splendid woman. I admire her, and so do all the priests on
Mount Hiei. I tried to give her some encouragement." Rinsing his cup in a bowl
of water, he offered it to Matahachi and continued: "Here, let's drink together
and wash away our old enmity. There's no reason to worry about Musashi if
you've got Sasaki Kojirō on your side."
      Matahachi refused the cup.
      "Why don't you drink?"
      "I can't. I have to go."
      As Matahachi started to get up, Kojirō grabbed him tightly by the wrist,
      saying, "Sit down!"
      "But Musashi's waiting."
       "Don't be an ass! If you attack Musashi by yourself, he'll kill you
instantly." "You've got it all wrong! He promised to help me. I'm going with him
to Edo to make a new start in life."
       "You mean you'd rely on a man like Musashi?"
       "Oh, I know, a lot of people say he's no good. But that's because my

mother's gone around slandering him. But she's wrong, has been all along. Now
that I've talked to him, I'm more sure of that than ever. He's my friend, and I'm
going to learn from him so that I can make something of myself too. Even if it is
a little late in the day."
        Roaring with laughter, Kojirō slapped the tatami with his hand. "How
could you be so innocent? Your mother told me you were unusually naive, but to
be taken in by—"
        "That's not true! Musashi's—"
        "Just be quiet! Listen. In the first place, how could you think of betraying
your own mother by siding with her enemy? It's inhuman. Even I, a total
stranger, was so moved by that valiant old lady that I swore to give her all the
support I can."
        "I don't care what you think. I'm going to meet Musashi, and don't try to
stop me. You, girl, bring my kimono! It should be dry by now."
        Raising his drunken eyes, Kojirō commanded, "Don't touch it until I tell
you to. Now look, Matahachi, if you plan to go with Musashi, you should at least
talk to your mother first."
        "I'm going on to Edo with Musashi. If I make something of myself there,
the whole problem will solve itself."
        "That sounds like something Musashi would say. In fact, I'd bet he put the
words in your mouth. Anyway, wait till tomorrow, and I'll go with you to look
for your mother. You have to listen to her opinion before you do anything. In the
meantime, let's enjoy ourselves. Like it or not, you're going to stay here and
drink with me."
        This being a brothel, and Kojirō the paying guest, the women all came to
his support. Matahachi's kimono was not forthcoming, and after a few drinks, he
stopped asking for it.
        Sober, Matahachi was no match for Kojirō. Inebriated, he could be
something of a menace. By the time day faded into night, he was demonstrating
to one and all how much he could drink, demanding more, saying everything he
should not say, airing all his resentments—in short, being a complete nuisance. It
was dawn before he passed out and noon before he came to again.
        The sun seemed all the brighter for the rain the previous afternoon. With
Musashi's words echoing in his head, Matahachi longed to throw up every drop
he had drunk. Fortunately, Kojirō was still asleep in another room. Matahachi
slipped downstairs, made the women give him his kimono, and set off at a run
for Seta.

       The muddy red water under the bridge was liberally sprinkled with
Ishiyamadera's fallen cherry blossoms. The storm had broken the wisteria vines
and strewn yellow kerria flowers everywhere.
       After a lengthy search, Matahachi asked at the tea shop and was told that
the man with the cow had waited until the shop closed for the night, then had
gone to an inn. He had returned in the morning, but not finding his friend, had
left a note tied to a willow branch.
       The note, which looked like a large white moth, said, "Sorry I couldn't
wait longer. Catch up with me on the way. I'll be looking for you."
       Matahachi made good time along the Nakasendō, the highroad leading
through Kiso to Edo, but he had still not caught up with Musashi when he
reached Kusatsu. After passing through Hikone and Toriimoto, he began to
suspect he had missed him on the way, and when he reached Suribachi Pass, he
waited half a day, keeping his eyes on the road the whole time.
       It wasn't until he reached the road for Mino that Kojirō's words came back
to him.
       "Was I taken in after all?" he asked himself. "Did Musashi really have no
intention of going with me?"
       After much doubling back and investigation of side roads, he finally
caught sight of Musashi just outside the town of Nakatsugawa. At first he was
elated, but when he got close enough to see that the person on the cow was Otsū,
jealousy took instant and complete control of him.
       "What a fool I've been," he growled, "from the day that bastard talked me
into going to Sekigahara until this very minute! Well, he can't walk all over me
this way forever. I'll get even with him somehow—and soon!"
