The Spreading Pine


       The wind soughed in the bamboo. Though it was still too dark to take
flight, birds were awake and chirping.
       "Don't attack! It's me—Kojirō!" Having run like a demon for more than a
mile, he was breathing heavily when he reached the spreading pine.
       The faces of the men who emerged from their hiding places to encircle him
were numb from waiting.
       "Didn't you find him?" Genzaemon asked impatiently.
       "I found him, all right," replied Kojirō with an inflection that turned every
eye upon him. Looking around coolly, he said, "I found him and we walked
together up the Takano River for a way, but then he—"
       "He ran away!" exclaimed Miike Jūrōzaemon.
       "No!" Kojirō said emphatically. "To judge from his calmness and from
what he said, I don't think he did. At first it seemed that way, but on second
thought I decided he was just trying to get rid of me. He's probably devised some
strategy he wanted to conceal from me. Better keep your guard up!"
      "Strategy? What kind of strategy?"
      They jostled closer to avoid missing a word.
      "I suspect he's enlisted several seconds. He was probably on his way to
      meet them so they could attack all at once."
      "Uh," groaned Genzaemon. "That seems likely. It also means it won't be
      long before they arrive."
       Jūrōzaemon separated himself from the group and ordered the men back to
their stations. "If Musashi attacks while we're scattered like this," he warned,
"we may lose the first skirmish. We don't know how many men he'll have with
him, but it can't be very many. We'll stick to our original plan."
      "He's right. Mustn't be caught off guard."
      "It's easy to make a mistake when you're tired of waiting. Be careful!" "Get
      to your posts!"
      Gradually they dispersed. The musketeer resettled himself in the upper
      branches of the pine tree.
      Kojirō, noticing Genjirō standing stiffly with his back to the trunk, asked,
      "Sleepy?"

      "No!" the boy replied pluckily.
       Kojirō patted him on the head. "Your lips have turned blue! You must be
cold. Since you're the representative of the House of Yoshioka, you have to be
brave and strong. Be patient a little longer and you'll see some interesting things
happen." Walking away, he added, "Now I have to find a good place for myself."
       The moon had traveled with Musashi from the hollow between Shiga Hill
and Uryū Hill, where he'd left Otsū. Now it sank behind the mountain, as a
gradual upward movement of the clouds resting on the thirty-six peaks served
notice that the world would soon be beginning its daily chores.
       He quickened his pace. Directly below him, a temple roof came into view.
"It's not far now," he thought. He looked up and reflected that in only a short
time—a few breaths—his spirit would join the clouds in their skyward flight. To
the universe, the death of one man could hardly have any more significance than
that of a butterfly, but in the realm of mankind, a single death could affect
everything, for better or worse. Musashi's only concern now was how to die a
noble death.
       The welcome sound of water struck his ears. Stopping and kneeling at the
foot of a tall rock, he scooped some water from the brook and drank quickly. His
tongue smarted from its freshness, an indication, he hoped, that his spirit was
calm and collected and his courage had not deserted him.
       Taking a moment to rest, he seemed to hear voices calling him. Otsū?
Jōtarō? He knew it couldn't be Otsū; she was not the kind to lose control of
herself and chase after him at a time like this. She knew him too well for that.
Still, he couldn't rid himself of the notion that he was being beckoned. He looked
back several times, hoping to see someone. The thought that he might be having
delusions was unnerving.
       But he couldn't afford to waste any more time. Being late would not only
mean breaking his promise but put him at a considerable disadvantage. For a
lone warrior attempting to take on an army of opponents, the ideal time, he
surmised, was the brief interval after the moon had set but before the sky was
completely light.
       He recalled the old saying "It is easy to crush an enemy outside oneself but
impossible to defeat an enemy within." He had vowed to expel Otsū from his
thoughts, had even bluntly told her this as she had clung to his sleeve. Yet he
seemed unable to shake her voice from his mind.
       He cursed softly. "I'm acting like a woman. A man on a man's mission has
no business thinking about frivolities like love!"

      He spurred himself on, running as fast as he could. Then all at once he
caught sight, below him, of a white ribbon rising from the foot of the mountain
through the bamboo and trees and fields, one of the roads to Ichijōji. He was
only about four hundred yards from the point where it met with the other two
roads. Through the milky mist he could make out the branches of the great
spreading pine.
      He dropped to his knees, his body tense. Even the trees around him
seemed transformed into potential enemies. As nimbly as a lizard, he left the
path and made his way to a point directly above the pine tree. A gust of cold
wind swept down from the mountaintop, pushing the mist in a great rolling wave
over the pine trees and bamboo. The branches of the spreading pine quivered, as
though to warn the world of impending disaster.
      Straining his eyes, he could just discern the figures of ten men standing
perfectly still around the pine tree, their lances poised. The presence of others
elsewhere on the mountain he could feel, even though he couldn't see them.
Musashi knew he had now entered the province of death. A feeling of awe
brought goose pimples even to the backs of his hands, but his breathing was
deep and steady. Down to the tips of his toes, he was keyed for action. As he
crept slowly forward, his toes gripped the ground with the strength and sureness
of fingers.
      A stone embankment that might once have been part of a fortress was
nearby. On an impulse, he made his way among the rocks to the eminence on
which it had stood. There he found a stone torii looking straight down on the
spreading pine. Behind it was the sacred precinct, protected by rows of tall
evergreens, among which he could see a shrine building.
      Though he had no idea which deity was honored here, he ran through the
grove to the shrine gate and knelt before it. With death so near, he could not keep
his heart from trembling at the thought of the sacred presence. The shrine was
dark inside, save for a holy lamp, swaying in the wind, threatening to expire,
then miraculously recapturing its full brightness. The plaque above the door read
"Hachidai Shrine."
      Musashi took comfort from the thought that he had a powerful ally, that if
he charged down the mountain, the god of war would be behind him. The gods,
he knew, always supported the side that was right. He recalled how the great
Nobunaga, on his way to the Battle of Okehazama, had paused to pay his
respects at the Atsuta Shrine. The discovery of this holy place seemed felicitous
indeed.

       Just inside the gate was a stone basin, where supplicants could cleanse
themselves before praying. He rinsed out his mouth, then took a second
mouthful and sprayed water on the hilt of his sword and the cords of his sandals.
Thus purified, he hitched up his sleeves with a leather thong and tied on a cotton
headband. Flexing his leg muscles as he walked, he went to the steps of the
shrine and put his hand on the rope hanging from the gong above the entrance. In
time-honored fashion, he was about to give the gong a rap and say a prayer to
the deity.
       Catching himself, he quickly withdrew his hand. "What am I doing?" he
thought in horror. The rope, plaited with red and white cotton cord, seemed to be
inviting him to take hold of it, sound the gong and make his supplication. He
stared at it. "What was I going to request?" he asked himself. "What need have I
of the help of the gods? Am I not already one with the universe? Haven't I
always said I must be prepared to face death at any time? Haven't I trained
myself to face death calmly and confidently?"
       He was appalled. Without thinking, without remembering his years of
training and self-discipline, he had been on the brink of begging for supernatural
assistance. Something was wrong, for deep down he knew that the samurai's true
ally was not the gods but death itself. Last night and earlier this morning, he had
felt confident that he had come to terms with his fate. And yet, there he was
within a hairbreadth of forgetting all he had ever learned, beseeching aid from
the deity. Head drooped in shame, he stood there like a rock.
       "What a fool I am! I thought I'd achieved purity and enlightenment, but
there is still, within me, something that longs to go on living. Some delusion
stirring up thoughts of Otsū or my sister. Some false hope leading me to clutch at
any straw. A diabolical yearning, causing me to forget myself, tempting me to
pray to the gods for help."
       He was disgusted, exasperated, with his body, with his soul, with his
failure to master the Way. The tears he had held back in Otsū's presence poured
from his eyes.
       "It was all unconscious. I had no intention of praying, hadn't even thought
of what I was going to pray for. But if I'm doing things unconsciously, that
makes it all the worse."
       Racked by doubt, he felt foolish and inadequate. Had he ever had the
ability to become a warrior in the first place? If he had achieved the state of calm
he had aspired to, there should have been no need, not even a subconscious need,
for prayers or supplications. In one shattering moment, only minutes before the

battle, he had discovered in his heart the true seeds of defeat. It was impossible
now to regard his approaching death as the culmination of a samurai's life!
        In the next breath a surge of gratitude swept over him. The presence and
magnanimity of the deity enveloped him. The battle had not yet begun; the real
test still lay before him. He had been warned in time. By recognizing his failure,
he had overcome it. Doubt vanished; the deity had guided him to this place to
teach him this.
        While believing sincerely in the gods, he did not consider it the Way of the
Samurai to seek their aid. The Way was an ultimate truth transcending gods and
Buddhas. Stepping back a pace, he folded his hands and, rather than ask for
protection, thanked the gods for their timely help.
        After a quick bow, he hurried out of the shrine compound and down the
narrow, steep path, the sort of path which a heavy downpour would quickly
convert into a rushing stream. Pebbles and brittle clumps of dirt tumbled down at
his heels, breaking the silence. When the spreading pine came into view again,
he leaped off the path and crouched in the bushes. Not a drop of dew had yet
fallen from the leaves, and his knees and chest were soon drenched. The pine
tree was no more than forty or fifty paces below him. He could see the man with
the musket in its branches.
        His anger flashed. "Cowards!" he said, almost out loud. "All this against
one man."
        In a way he felt a little sorry for an enemy who had to go to such extremes.
Still, he had expected something like this and was, insofar as possible, prepared
for it. Since they would naturally assume that he was not alone, prudence would
dictate that they have at least one flying weapon, and probably more. If they
were also using short bows, the archers were probably hidden behind rocks or on
lower ground.
        Musashi had one great advantage: both the man in the tree and the men
underneath it had their backs to him. Stooping so low that the hilt of his sword
rose above his head, he crept, almost crawled, forward. Then he covered about
twenty paces at a dead run.
      The musketeer twisted his head around, spotted him and shouted, "There he
      is!"
      Musashi ran on another ten paces, knowing that the man would have to
      reverse his position to aim and fire.
      "Where?" cried the men nearest the tree.
      "Behind you!" came the throat-splitting reply.

       The musketeer had his weapon trained on Musashi's head. While sparks
from the fuse showered down, Musashi's right elbow described an arc in the air.
The rock he hurled hit the fuse squarely with terrific force. The musketeer's
scream mingled with the sound of cracking branches as he plunged to the
ground.
       In an instant Musashi's name was on every man's lips. Not one of them had
taken the trouble to think the situation through, to imagine that he might devise a
means of attacking the central corps first. Their confusion was all but total. In
their rush to reorient themselves, the ten men bumped into each other, got their
weapons tangled, tripped each other with their lances and otherwise displayed a
perfect picture of disorder, all the while screaming at each other not to let
Musashi escape.
       Just as they sorted themselves out and began to form a semicircle, they
were challenged: "I am Miyamoto Musashi, the son of Shimmen Munisai of
Mimasaka Province. I have come in accordance with our agreement made the
day before yesterday at Yanagimachi.
       "Genjirō, are you there? I beg you not to be careless like Seijūrō and
Denshichirō before you. I understand that, because of your youth, you have
several score men to support you. I, Musashi, have come alone. Your men may
attack individually or in a group, as they wish.
       "Now, fight!"
       Another total surprise: no one expected Musashi to deliver a formal
challenge. Even those who would desperately have liked to reply in kind lacked
the necessary composure.
       "Musashi, you're late!" cried a hoarse voice.
       Many took encouragement from Musashi's declaration that he was alone,
but Genzaemon and Jūrōzaemon, believing it was a trick, started looking around
for phantom seconds.
       A loud twang off to one side was followed a split second later by the glint
of Musashi's sword flashing through the air. The arrow aimed at his face broke,
half falling behind his shoulder, the other half near the tip of his lowered sword.
       Or rather where his sword had just been, for Musashi was already on the
move. His hair bristling like a lion's mane, he was bounding toward the shadowy
form behind the spreading pine.
       Genjirō hugged the trunk, screaming, "Help! I'm scared!"
       Genzaemon jumped forward, howling as though the blow had struck him,
but he was too late. Musashi's sword sliced a two-foot strip of bark off the trunk.

It fell to the ground by Genjirō's blood-covered head.
        It was the act of a ferocious demon. Musashi, ignoring the others, had
made straight for the boy. And it seemed he had had this in mind from the
beginning.
        The assault was of a savagery beyond conception. Genjirō's death did not
reduce the Yoshiokas' fighting capacity in the slightest. What had been nervous
excitement rose to the level of murderous frenzy.
        "Beast!" screamed Genzaemon, face livid with grief and rage. He rushed
headlong at Musashi, wielding a sword somewhat too heavy for a man of his
age. Musashi shifted his right heel back a foot or so, leaned aside and struck
upward, grazing Genzaemon's elbow and face with the tip of his sword. It was
impossible to tell who wailed, for at that moment a man attacking Musashi from
the rear with a lance stumbled forward and fell on top of the old man. The next
instant, a third swordsman coming from the front was sliced from shoulder to
navel. His head sagged and his arms went limp as his legs carried his lifeless
body forward a few more steps.
        The other men near the tree screamed their lungs out, but the calls for help
were lost in the wind and trees. Their comrades were too far away to hear and
couldn't have seen what happened even if they'd been looking toward the pine
tree instead of watching the roads.
        The spreading pine had been standing for hundreds of years. It had
witnessed the retreat of the defeated Taira troops from Kyoto to Omi in the wars
of the twelfth century. Innumerable were the times it had seen the warrior-priests
of Mount Hiei descend on the capital to put pressure on the Imperial Court.
Whether out of gratitude for the fresh blood seeping through to its roots or out of
anguish over the carnage, its branches stirred in the misty wind and scattered
drops of cold dew on the men beneath. The wind gave rise to a medley of
sounds, from the branches, from the swaying bamboo, from the mist, from the
tall grass.
        Musashi took a stance with his back against the tree trunk, whose girth
could hardly be spanned by two men with outstretched arms. The tree made an
ideal shield for his rear, but he seemed to consider it hazardous to stay there
long. As his eye traveled down the top edge of his sword and fastened on his
opponents, his brain reviewed the terrain, searched for a better position.
        "Go to the spreading pine! The pine tree! The fighting's there!" The shout
came from the top of the rise from which Sasaki Kojirō had chosen to view the
spectacle.

       Then came a deafening report from the musket, and at last the samurai of
the House of Yoshioka grasped what was going on. Swarming like bees, they left
their hiding places and hurtled toward the crossroads.
       Musashi slipped deftly sideways. The bullet lodged in the tree trunk,
inches from his head. On guard, the seven men facing him edged around a
couple of feet to compensate for his change in position.
       Without warning, Musashi darted toward the man at the extreme left, his
sword held at eye level. The man—Kobashi Kurando, one of the Yoshioka Ten
—was taken completely by surprise. With a low cry of dismay, he whirled on
one foot, but he was not quick enough to escape the blow to his side. Musashi,
sword still extended, continued running straight ahead.
       "Don't let him get away!"
       The other six rushed after him. But the attack had again thrown them into
perilous disarray, all coordination lost. In a flash, Musashi spun around, striking
laterally at the nearest man, Miike Jūrōzaemon. Experienced swordsman that he
was, Jūrōzaemon had anticipated this and left some play in his legs, so that he
was able to quickly move backward. The tip of Musashi's sword barely grazed
his chest.
       Musashi's use of his weapon differed from that of the ordinary swordsman
of his time. By normal techniques, if the first blow did not connect, the force of
the sword was spent in the air. It was necessary to bring the blade back before
striking again. This was too slow for Musashi. Whenever he struck laterally,
there was a return blow. A slice to the right was followed in essentially the same
motion by a return strike to the left. His blade created two streaks of light, the
pattern very much like two pine needles joined at one end.
       The unexpected return stroke slashed upward through Jūrōzaemon's face,
turning his head into a large red tomato.
       Not having studied under a teacher, Musashi found himself occasionally at
a disadvantage, but there were also times when he had profited from this. One of
his strengths was that he had never been pressed into the mold of any particular
school. From the orthodox point of view, his style had no discernible form, no
rules, no secret techniques. Created by his own imagination and his own needs, it
was hard to define or categorize. To an extent, he could be challenged effectively
using conventional styles, if his opponent was highly skilled. Jūrōzaemon had
not anticipated Musashi's tactic. Anyone adept at the Yoshioka Style, or for that
matter at any of the other Kyoto styles, would probably have been taken
unawares in similar fashion.

       If, following through on his fatal blow to Jūrōzaemon, Musashi had
charged the motley group that remained around the tree, he would certainly have
slain several more of them in short order. Instead he ran toward the crossroads.
But then, just as they thought he was about to flee, he suddenly turned and
attacked again. By the time they had regrouped to defend themselves, he was
gone again.
      "Musashi!"
      "Coward!"
      "Fight like a man!"
      "We're not through with you yet!"
       The usual imprecations filled the air, as furious eyes threatened to pop out
of their sockets. The men were drunk on the sight and smell of blood, as drunk
as if they had swallowed a storehouseful of sake. The sight of blood, which
makes a brave man cooler, has the opposite effect on cowards. These men were
like goblins surfacing from a lake of gore.
       Leaving the shouts behind him, Musashi reached the crossroads and
plunged immediately into the narrowest of the three paths of exit, the one
leading toward the Shugakuin. Coming helter-skelter from the opposite direction
were the men who had been stationed along the path. Before he had gone forty
paces, Musashi saw the first man in this contingent. By the ordinary laws of
physics, he would soon be trapped between these men and those pursuing him.
In fact, when the two forces collided, he was no longer there.
      "Musashi! Where are you?"
      "He came this way. I saw him!"
      "He must have!"
      "He's not here!"
      Musashi's voice broke through the confused babble. "Here I am!"
       He jumped from the shadow of a rock to the middle of the road behind the
returning samurai, so that he had them all to one side. Dumbfounded by this
lightning change of position, the Yoshioka men moved on him as rapidly as they
could, but in the narrow path they could not concentrate their strength.
Considering the space needed to swing a sword, it would have been dangerous
for even two of them to try to move forward abreast.
       The man nearest Musashi stumbled backward, pushing the man behind
him back into the oncoming group. For a time, they all floundered about
helplessly, legs clumsily entwined. But mobs do not give up easily. Though
frightened by Musashi's speed and ferocity, the men soon gained confidence in

their collective strength. With a stirring roar, they moved forward, again
convinced that no single swordsman was a match for all of them.
       Musashi fought like a swimmer battling giant waves. Striking once, then
retreating a step or two, he had to give more attention to his defense than to his
attack. He even refrained from cutting down men who stumbled into range and
were easy prey, both because their loss would only result in meager gains and
because, if he missed, he would have been exposed to the thrusts of the enemy's
lances. It was possible to judge the range of a sword accurately, but not that of a
lance.
       As he continued his slow retreat, his attackers pressed on relentlessly. His
face was bluish-white; it seemed inconceivable that he was breathing adequately.
The Yoshioka men hoped that he would eventually stumble on a tree root or trip
on a rock. At the same time, none of them was eager to get too close to a man
fighting desperately for his life. The nearest of the swords and lances pressing in
on him were always two or three inches short of their target.
       The tumult was punctuated by the whinnying of a packhorse; people were
up and about in the nearby hamlet. This was the hour when early-rising priests
passed by on their way to and from the top of Mount Hiei, clopping along on
raised wooden sandals, their shoulders proudly squared. As the battle
progressed, woodcutters and farmers joined the priests on the road to witness the
spectacle, and then excited cries set up an answering response from every
chicken and horse in the village. A crowd of bystanders collected around the
shrine where Musashi had prepared for battle. The wind had dropped and the
mist descended again like a thick white veil. Then all of a sudden it lifted, giving
the spectators a clear view.
       During the few minutes of fighting, Musashi's appearance had changed
completely. His hair was matted and gory; blood mixed with sweat had dyed his
headband pink. He looked like the devil incarnate, charging up from hell. He
was breathing with his whole body, his shieldlike chest heaving like a volcano. A
rip in his hakama exposed a wound on his left knee; the white ligaments visible
at the bottom of the gash were like seeds in a split pomegranate. There was also
a cut on his forearm, which, though not serious, had spattered blood from his
chest to the small sword in his obi. His whole kimono appeared to have been tie-
dyed with a crimson design. Onlookers who had a clear view of him covered
their eyes in horror.
       More ghastly still was the sight of the dead and wounded left in his wake.
As he continued his tactical retreat up the path, he reached a patch of open land

where his pursuers surged forward in a mass attack. In a matter of seconds, four
or five men had been cut down. They lay scattered over a wide area, moribund
testimony to the speed with which Musashi struck and moved on. He seemed to
be everywhere at once.
       But for all his agile shifts and dodges, Musashi clung to one basic strategy.
He never attacked a group from the front or the side—always obliquely at an
exposed corner. Whenever a battery of samurai approached him head on, he
somehow contrived to shift like lightning to a corner of their formation, from
which he could confront only one or two of them at a time. In this way, he
managed to keep them in essentially the same position. But eventually, Musashi
was bound to be worn down. Eventually, too, his opponents seemed bound to
find a way to thwart his method of attack. To do this, they would need to form
themselves into two large forces, before and behind him. Then he would be in
even greater danger. It took all Musashi's resourcefulness to stop that from
happening.
       At some point, Musashi drew his smaller sword and started to fight with
both hands. While the large sword in his right hand was smeared with blood, up
to the hilt and the fist that held it, the small sword in his left hand was clean. And
though it picked up a bit of flesh the first time it was used, it continued to
sparkle, greedy for blood. Musashi himself was not yet fully aware that he had
drawn it, even though he was wielding it with the same deftness as the larger
sword.
       When not actually striking, he held the left sword so that it was pointed
directly at his opponent's eyes. The right sword extended out to the side, forming
a broad horizontal arc with his elbow and shoulder, and was largely outside the
enemy's line of vision. If the opponent moved to Musashi's right, he could bring
the right sword into play. If the attacker moved the other way, Musashi could
shift the small sword in to his left and trap him between the two swords. By
thrusting forward, he could pin the man in one place with the smaller sword and,
before there was time to dodge, attack with the large sword. In later years, this
method came to be formally named the Two-Sword Technique Against a Large
Force, but at this moment he was fighting by pure instinct.
       By all accepted standards, Musashi was not a great sword technician.
Schools, styles, theories, traditions—none of these meant anything to him. His
mode of fighting was completely pragmatic. What he knew was only what he
had learned from experience. He wasn't putting theory into practice; he fought
first and theorized later.

       The Yoshioka men, from the Ten Swordsmen on down, had all had the
theories of the Kyōhachi Style pounded thoroughly into their skulls. Some of
them had even gone on to create stylistic variations of their own. Despite being
highly trained and highly disciplined fighters, they had no way of gauging a
swordsman like Musashi, who had spent his time as an ascetic in the mountains,
exposing himself to the dangers presented by nature as often as to those
presented by man. To the Yoshioka men, it was incomprehensible that Musashi,
with his breathing so erratic, face ashen, eyes bleary with sweat and body
covered with gore, was still able to wield two swords and threaten to make short
work of anyone who came within range. But he fought on like a god of fire and
fury. They themselves were dead tired, and their attempts to pin down this
bloody specter were becoming hysterical.
      All at once, the tumult increased.
      "Run!" cried a thousand voices.
      "You, fighting by yourself, run!"
      "Run while you can!"
       The shouts came from the mountains, the trees, the white clouds above.
Spectators on all sides saw the Yoshioka forces actually closing in on Musashi.
The impending peril moved them all to try to save him, if only with their voices.
       But their warnings made no impression. Musashi would not have noticed if
the earth had split asunder or the heavens cast down crackling bolts of lightning.
The uproar reached a crescendo, shaking the thirty-six peaks like an earthquake.
It issued simultaneously from the spectators and the jostling throng of Yoshioka
samurai.
       Musashi had finally taken off across the mountainside with the speed of a
wild boar. In no time, five or six men were on his heels, trying desperately to get
in a solid blow.
       Musashi, with a vicious howl, suddenly wheeled, crouched and swung his
sword sideways at shin level, stopping them in their tracks. One man brought his
lance down from above, only to see it knocked into the air by a powerful
counterblow. They shrank back. Musashi swung fiercely with the left sword,
then the right, then the left again. Moving like a combination of fire and water,
he had his enemies reeling and cowering, tottering and stumbling in his wake.
       Then he was gone again. He had leapt from the open land across which the
battle had been raging into a green field of barley below.
       "Stop!"
       "Come back and fight!"

      Two men in hot pursuit jumped blindly after Musashi. A second later, there
were two death screams, two lances flying through the air and coming to rest
upright in the middle of the field. Musashi was slithering like a great ball of mud
through the far end of the field. Already a hundred yards away, he was rapidly
widening the gap.
      "He's going toward the village."
      "He's heading for the main road."
      But in fact he had crawled rapidly and invisibly up the far edge of the field
and was now hidden in the woods above. He watched his pursuers dividing up to
continue their chase in several directions.
      It was daylight, a sunny morning, much like any other.
