The Elegant People


       "No impudent nobleman's going to get the best of me! If he thinks he can
put me off by sending a blank piece of paper, I'll just have to have a word with
him. And I'll bring Yoshino back, if only for the sake of my pride."
      It is said that one need not be young to enjoy playing games. When Haiya
      Shōyū was in his cups, there was no holding him back.
      "Take me to their room!" he ordered Sumigiku. He put a hand on her
      shoulder to prop himself into a standing position.
      In vain, Kōetsu admonished him to be calm.
      "No! I'm going to get Yoshino.... Standard bearers, ho! Your general is
      moving into action! Those with heart, follow!"
       A peculiar characteristic of the inebriated is that though they appear to be
in constant danger of falling, or suffering some worse mishap, if left alone they
usually escape harm. Still, if no one took measures to protect them, it would be a
cold world indeed. With all his years of experience, Shōyū was able to draw a
fine line between amusing himself and entertaining others. When they thought
him tipsy enough to be easy to handle, he would contrive to be as difficult as
possible, staggering and tottering until someone came to his rescue, at which
point there would be a meeting of spirits on the boundary where drunkenness
evokes sympathetic response.
      "You'll fall," cried Sumigiku, rushing to prevent this.
      "Don't be silly. My legs may wobble a bit, but my spirit's firm!" He sounded
      peevish.
      "Try walking alone."
      She let go, and he immediately slumped to the floor.
      "I guess I'm a little tired. Someone'll have to carry me."
       On the way to Lord Kangan's parlor, appearing to know nothing, yet
perfectly conscious of everything, he staggered, swayed, turned into jelly, and
otherwise kept his companions on edge from one end of the long hallway to the
other.
       At stake was whether or not "insolent, half-baked noblemen," as he called
them, were going to monopolize Yoshino Dayū. The great merchants, who were
nothing more than rich commoners, did not stand in awe of the Emperor's

courtiers. True, they were appallingly rank-conscious, but this counted for little
because they had no money. By spreading around enough gold to keep them
happy, participating in their elegant pastimes, making a show of deference to
their status and allowing them to maintain their pride, it was possible to
manipulate them like puppets. No one knew this better than Shōyū.
       Light danced gaily on the shoji of the anteroom to Lord Karasumaru's
parlor as Shōyū fumbled to open it.
       Abruptly the door was opened from inside. "Why, Shōyū, it's you!"
exclaimed Takuan Sōhō.
       Shōyū's eyes widened, first in astonishment, then in delight. "Good priest,"
he sputtered, "what a pleasant surprise! Have you been here all along?"
       "And you, good sir, have you been here all along?" mimicked Takuan. He
put his arm around Shōyū's neck, and the two drunkenly embraced like a pair of
lovers, cheek against stubbled cheek.
      "Are you well, you old scoundrel?"
      "Yes, you old fraud. And you?"
      "I've been hoping to see you."
      "And I you."
      Before the maudlin greeting had run its course, the two were patting each
      other on the head and licking each other on the nose.
       Lord Karasumaru turned his attention from the anteroom to Lord Konoe
Nobutada, who sat opposite him, and said with a sardonic grin, "Ha! Just as I
expected. The noisy one has arrived."
       Karasumaru Mitsuhiro was still young, perhaps thirty. Even without his
impeccable dress, he would have had an aristocratic air about him, for he was
handsome and light-complexioned, with thick eyebrows, crimson lips and
intelligent eyes. While he gave the impression of being a very gentle man,
beneath the polished surface lurked a strong temper, fed by pent-up resentment
against the military class. Often he had been heard to say, "Why, in this age
when only the warriors are deemed to be full-fledged human beings, did I have
to be born a nobleman?"
       In his opinion, the warrior class should concern itself with military matters
and nothing else, and any young courtier with intelligence who did not bridle at
the current state of affairs was a fool. The warriors' assumption of absolute
control reversed the ancient principle that government should be carried on by
the Imperial Court with the aid of the military. The samurai no longer made any
attempt to maintain harmony with the nobility; they ran everything, treating

members of the court as though they were mere ornaments. Not only were the
ornate headdresses the courtiers were allowed to wear meaningless, but the
decisions they were allowed to make could have been made by dolls.
       Lord Karasumaru considered it a grave mistake on the part of the gods to
have made a man like himself a nobleman. And, though a servant of the
Emperor, he saw only two paths open to him: to live in constant misery or to
spend his time carousing. The sensible choice was to rest his head on the knees
of a beautiful woman, admire the pale light of the moon, view the cherry
blossoms in season and die with a cup of sake in his hand.
       Having advanced from Imperial Minister of Finance to Assistant Vice
Minister of the Right and then to Imperial Councilor, he was a high official in
the Emperor's impotent bureaucracy, but he spent a great deal of time in the
licensed quarter, where the atmosphere was conducive to forgetting the insults he
had to endure when attending to more practical affairs. Among his habitual
companions were several other disgruntled young noblemen, all of them poor in
comparison with the military rulers but somehow able to raise the money for
their nightly excursions to the Ōgiya—the only place, they averred, where they
were free to feel human.
       Tonight he had as his guest a man of another sort, the taciturn, well-
mannered Konoe Nobutada, who was about ten years older. Nobutada, too, had
an aristocratic demeanor and a grave look in his eyes. His face was full and his
eyebrows thick, and though his darkish complexion was marred by shallow
pockmarks, the pleasant modesty of the man made the blemishes seem somehow
appropriate. In places like the Ōgiya, an outsider would never have guessed he
was one of Kyoto's highest-ranking noblemen, the head of the family from
which imperial regents were chosen.
       Smiling affably by Yoshino's side, he turned to her and said, "That's Mr.
Funabashi's voice, isn't it?"
       She bit her lips, already redder than plum blossoms, and her eyes betrayed
embarrassment at the awkwardness of the situation. "What shall I do if he comes
in?" she fretted.
       Lord Karasumaru commanded, "Don't stand up!" and grasped the hem of
her kimono.
       "Takuan, what are you doing out there? It's cold with the door open. If
you're going out, go, and if you're coming back, come back, but close the door."
       Swallowing the bait, Takuan said to Shōyū, "Come on in," and pulled the
old man into the room.

       Shōyū walked over and sat down directly in front of the two noblemen.
"My, what a pleasant surprise!" exclaimed Mitsuhiro with feigned sincerity.
Shōyū, on his bony knees, edged closer. Sticking his hand out toward Nobutada,
he said, "Give me some sake." Having received the cup, he bowed with
exaggerated ceremony.
       "Good to see you, Old Man Funabashi," said Nobutada with a grin. "You
always seem to be in high spirits."
       Shōyū drained the cup and returned it. "I didn't dream that Lord Kangan's
companion was your excellency." Still pretending to be drunker than he actually
was, he shook his thin, wrinkled neck like an ancient manservant and said in
mock fear, "Forgive me, esteemed excellency!" Then, in a different tone, "Why
should I be so polite? Ha, ha! Isn't that so, Takuan?" He put his arm around
Takuan's neck, pulled the priest toward him and pointed a finger at the two
courtiers. "Takuan," he said, "the people in this world I feel sorriest for are the
noblemen. They bear resounding titles like Councilor or Regent, but there's
nothing to go with the honors. Even the merchants are better off, don't you
think?"
       "I do indeed," replied Takuan, contriving to disengage his neck.
       "Say," said Shōyū, placing a cup directly beneath the priest's nose. "I
haven't received a drink from you yet."
       Takuan poured him some sake. The old man drank.
       "You're a wily man, Takuan. In the world we live in, priests like you are
cunning, merchants smart, warriors strong and noblemen stupid. Ha, ha! Isn't
that so?"
       "It is, it is," agreed Takuan.
       "The noblemen can't do as they please because of their rank, but they're
shut out of politics and the government. So all that's left for them to do is
compose poetry or become experts at calligraphy. Isn't that the truth?" He
laughed again.
       Though Mitsuhiro and Nobutada were as fond of fun as Shōyū, the
bluntness of the ridicule was embarrassing. They responded with stony silence.
       Taking advantage of their discomfort, Shōyū pressed on. "Yoshino, what
do you think? Do you fancy noblemen, or do you prefer merchants?"
       "Hee-hee," tittered Yoshino. "Why, Mr. Funabashi, what a strange
question!"
       "I'm not joking. I'm trying to peer deep into a woman's heart. Now I can
see what's there. You really prefer merchants, don't you? I think I'd better take

you away from here. Come with me to my parlor." He took her by the hand and
stood up, a shrewd look on his face.
       Mitsuhiro, startled, spilled his sake. "A joke can be carried too far," he
said, yanking Yoshino's hand from Shōyū's and pulling her closer to his side.
       Caught between the two, Yoshino laughed and tried to make the best of it.
Taking Mitsuhiro's hand in her right hand and Shōyū's in her left, she put on a
worried look and said, "What am I ever going to do with you two?"
       For the two men, though they neither disliked each other nor were serious
rivals in love, the rules of the game dictated that they do everything in their
power to make Yoshino Dayū's position more embarrassing.
       "Come now, my good lady," said Shōyū. "You must decide for yourself.
You must choose the man whose room you will grace, the one to whom you will
give your heart."
       Takuan jumped into the fray. "A very interesting problem, isn't it? Tell us,
Yoshino, which one is your choice?"
       The only person not participating was Nobutada. After a time, his sense of
propriety moved him to say, "Come now, you're guests; don't be rude. The way
you're acting, I daresay Yoshino would be delighted to be rid of you both. Why
don't we all enjoy ourselves and stop bothering her? Kōetsu must be all by
himself. One of you girls go and invite him to come here."
       Shōyū waved his hand. "No reason to fetch him. I'll just go back to my
room with Yoshino."
       "You will not," said Mitsuhiro, hugging her tighter.
       "The insolence of the aristocracy!" exclaimed Shōyū. Eyes sparkling, he
offered Mitsuhiro a cup, saying, "Let's decide who gets her by holding a drinking
contest—right before her eyes."
       "Why, of course; that sounds like good fun." Mitsuhiro took a large cup
and placed it on a small table between them. "Are you sure you're young enough
to stand it?" he asked playfully.
       "Don't have to be young to compete with a skinny nobleman!"
       "How are we going to decide whose turn it is? It's no fun just swilling. We
should play a game. Whoever loses has to drink a cupful. What game shall we
play?"
      "We could try staring each other down."
      "That would involve looking at your ugly merchant's face. That's not play;
      it's torture."
      "Don't be insulting! Um, how about the stone-scissors-paper game?"

      "Fine!"
      "Takuan, you be referee."
      "Anything to oblige."
      With earnest faces, they began. After each round, the loser complained with
      appropriate bitterness and everyone laughed.
        Yoshino Dayū slipped quietly out of the room, gracefully trailing the
bottom of her long kimono behind her, and walked at a stately pace down the
hallway. Not long after she left, Konoe Nobutada said, "I must go too," and took
his leave unnoticed.
        Yawning shamelessly, Takuan lay down and without so much as a by-your-
leave, rested his head on Sumigiku's knee. Though it felt good to doze here, he
also felt a pang of guilt. "I should go home," he thought. "They're probably
lonely without me." He was thinking of Jōtarō and Otsū, who were together
again at Lord Karasumaru's house. Takuan had taken Otsū there after her ordeal
at Kiyomizudera.
        Takuan and Lord Karasumaru were old friends with many interests in
common—poetry, Zen, drinking, even politics. Toward the end of the previous
year, Takuan had received a letter inviting him to spend the New Year's holidays
in Kyoto. "You seem to be cooped up in a little temple in the country," Mitsuhiro
wrote. "Don't you long for the capital, for some good Nada sake, for the
company of beautiful women, for the sight of the little plovers by the Kamo
River? If you like to sleep, I suppose it's all right to practice your Zen in the
country, but if you want something more lively, then come here and be among
people. Should you feel any nostalgia for the capital, by all means pay us a
visit."
        Shortly after his arrival, early in the new year, Takuan was quite surprised
to see Jōtarō playing in the courtyard. He learned in detail from Mitsuhiro what
the boy was doing there and then heard from Jōtarō that there had been no news
of Otsū since Osugi got her clutches into the girl on New Year's Day.
        The morning after her return, Otsū had come down with a fever, and she
was still in bed, with Jōtarō nursing her, sitting by her pillow all day, cooling her
forehead with wet towels and measuring out her medicine at the proper times of
the day.
        As much as Takuan wanted to leave, he could hardly do so before his host
did, and Mitsuhiro seemed to be more and more absorbed in the drinking
contest.
        Both combatants being veterans, the contest seemed destined to end in a

draw, which it did. They went on drinking anyway, facing each other knee to
knee and chatting animatedly. Takuan could not tell whether the subject was
government by the military class, the inherent worth of the nobility, or the role of
merchants in the development of foreign trade, but evidently it was something
very serious. He lifted his head from Sumigiku's knee and, eyes still closed,
leaned against a post of the alcove, every once in a while grinning at a snatch of
conversation.
     Presently Mitsuhiro asked, in an injured tone, "Where's Nobutada? Did he
     go home?"
     "Never mind him. Where's Yoshino?" Shōyū asked, suddenly looking quite
     sober.
     Mitsuhiro told Rin'ya to go and bring Yoshino back.
      As she passed the room where Shōyū and Kōetsu had started out the
evening, Rin'ya looked in. Musashi was sitting there alone, his face next to the
white light of the lamp.
     "Why, I didn't know you were back," said Rin'ya.
     "I haven't been here long."
     "Did you come in by the back way?"
     "Yes."
     "Where did you go?"
     "Umm, outside the district."
      "I bet you had an engagement with a beautiful girl. Shame on you! Shame
on you! I'm going to tell my mistress," she said saucily.
      Musashi laughed. "No one's here," he said. "What happened to them?"
"They're in another room, playing games with Lord Kangan and a priest."
"Kōetsu too?"
      "No. I don't know where he is."
      "Maybe he went home. If he did, I should go too."
      "You mustn't say that. When you come to this house, you can't leave
without Yoshino Dayū's consent. If you just sneak away, people will laugh at
you. And I'll be scolded."
      Not being attuned to the humor of the courtesans, he received this news
      with serious countenance, thinking: "So that's the way they do things
here." "You absolutely mustn't go without taking your leave properly. Just wait
      here until I come back."
      A few minutes later Takuan appeared. "And where did you come from?"
he asked, with a tap on the rōnin's shoulder.

       "What?" gasped Musashi. Slipping off his cushion, he put both hands on
the floor and bowed deeply. "What a long time since I saw you last!"
       Lifting Musashi's hands from the floor, Takuan said, "This place is for fun
and relaxation. No need for formal greetings.... I was told Kōetsu was here too,
but I don't see him."
       "Where do you suppose he could have gone?"
       "Let's find him. I do have a number of things to talk to you about privately,
but they can wait until a more suitable occasion."
       Takuan opened the door into the next room. There, with his feet in the
covered kotatsu and a quilt over him, lay Kōetsu, sequestered from the rest of the
room by a small gold screen. He was sleeping peacefully. Takuan could not bring
himself to wake him.
       Kōetsu opened his eyes of his own accord. He stared for a moment at the
priest's face, then at Musashi's, not quite knowing what to make of it.
       After they had explained the situation to him, Kōetsu said, "If it's only you
and Mitsuhiro in the other room, I have no objection to going there."
       They found that Mitsuhiro and Shōyū, having finally talked themselves
out, had sunk into melancholy. They had reached the stage where the sake begins
to taste bitter, the lips feel parched, and a sip of water evokes thoughts of home.
Tonight the aftereffects were worse; Yoshino had deserted them.
       "Why don't we all go home?" someone suggested.
       "We might as well," agreed the others.
       Though not really eager to leave, they were afraid that if they stayed
longer, nothing would be left of the evening's mellowness. But as they stood up
to go, Rin'ya came running into the room with two younger girls. Clasping Lord
Kangan's hands, Rin'ya said, "We're sorry to have kept you waiting. Please don't
leave. Yoshino Dayū is ready to receive you in her private quarters. I know it's
late, but it's light outside—because of the snow—and in this cold you should at
least warm yourselves properly before getting in your palanquins. Come with
us."
       None of them felt like playing anymore. The spirit, once gone, was
difficult to summon back.
       Noting their hesitation, one of the attendants said, "Yoshino said she was
sure you all thought her rude for leaving, but she saw nothing else to do. If she
gave in to Lord Kangan, Mr. Funabashi would be hurt, and if she went away
with Mr. Funabashi, Lord Kangan would be lonesome. She doesn't want either of
you to feel slighted, so she's inviting you for a nightcap. Please understand how

she feels, and stay a little longer."
       Sensing that a refusal would be ungallant—and more than a little curious
to see the leading courtesan in her own living quarters—they allowed themselves
to be persuaded. Guided by the girls, they found five pairs of rustic straw sandals
at the top of the garden steps. Donning these, they made their way soundlessly
across the soft snow. Musashi had no idea of what was going on, but the others
assumed they were to take part in a tea ceremony, for Yoshino was known to be
an ardent devotee of the tea cult. Since there was something to be said for a bowl
of tea after all the drinking they had done, no one was upset until they were led
on past the teahouse and into an overgrown field.
       "Where are you taking us?" asked Lord Kangan in an accusing tone. "This
is a mulberry patch!"
       The girls giggled, and Rin'ya hastened to explain. "Oh, no! This is our
peony garden. In the early summer, we put out stools, and everybody comes here
to drink and admire the blossoms."
       "Mulberry patch or peony garden, it's not very pleasant being out here in
the snow. Is Yoshino trying to make us catch cold?"
       "I'm sorry. It's only a little farther."
       In the corner of the field was a little cottage with a thatched roof, which,
from the looks of it, was probably a farmhouse that had been here since before
the area was built up. There was a grove of trees behind it, and the yard was cut
off from the well-cared-for garden of the Ōgiya.
       "This way," urged the girls, leading them into a dirt-floored room whose
walls and posts were black with soot.
       Rin'ya announced their arrival, and from the interior Yoshino Dayū
answered, "Welcome! Please come in."
       The fire in the hearth cast a soft, red glow on the shoji paper. The
atmosphere seemed utterly remote from the city. As the men looked around the
kitchen and noticed straw rain capes hanging on one wall, they wondered what
sort of entertainment Yoshino had planned for them. The shoji slid open, and one
by one they stepped up into the hearth room.
       Yoshino's kimono was a pale solid yellow, her obi of black satin. She wore
the minimum of makeup and had rearranged her hair into a simple housewifely
style. Her guests stared at her with admiration.
       "How unusual!"
       "How charming!"
       In her unpretentious outfit, set off by the blackened walls, Yoshino was a

hundred times more beautiful than she was in the elaborately embroidered
Momoyama-style costumes she wore at other times. The gaudy kimonos the men
were accustomed to, the iridescent lipstick and the setting of gold screens and
silver candlesticks were necessary for a woman in her business. But Yoshino had
no need for props to enhance her beauty.
        "Hmm," said Shōyū, "this is something quite special." Not one to offer
praise lightly, the old man, with his acerbic tongue, seemed temporarily tamed.
        Without spreading cushions, Yoshino invited them to sit down by the
hearth.
        "I live here, as you can see, and I can't offer you much, but at least there's a
fire. I hope you agree, a fire is the most excellent feast one can present on a cold
snowy night, whether one's guest is prince or pauper. There's a good supply of
kindling, so even if we talk the night out, I won't have to use the potted plants for
fuel. Please, make yourselves comfortable."
        The nobleman, the merchant, the artist and the priest sat cross-legged by
the hearth, with their hands over the fire. Kōetsu reflected on the cold walk from
the Ōgiya and the invitation to the cheery fire. It actually was like a feast, the
essence, really, of entertaining.
        "You come up by the fire too," said Yoshino. She smiled invitingly at
Musashi and moved slightly to make a place for him.
        Musashi was struck by the exalted company he was in. Next to Toyotomi
Hideyoshi and Tokugawa Ieyasu, she was probably the most famous person in
Japan. Of course, there was Okuni of Kabuki fame and Hideyoshi's mistress
Yodogimi, but Yoshino was regarded as having more class than the former and
more wit, beauty and kindness than the latter. The men who associated with
Yoshino were known as the "buyers," while she herself was called "the Tayū."
Any courtesan of the first class was known as Tayū, but to say "the Tayū" meant
Yoshino and no one else. Musashi had heard that she had seven attendants to
bathe her and two to cut her nails.
        This evening, for the first time in his life, Musashi found himself in the
company of painted and polished ladies, and he reacted by becoming stiffly
formal. This was partly because he could not help wondering what men found so
extraordinary about Yoshino.
        "Please, relax," she said. "Come sit here."
        After the fourth or fifth invitation, he capitulated. Taking his place beside
her, he imitated the others, extending his hands awkwardly over the fire.
        Yoshino glanced at his sleeve and saw a spot of red. While the others were

immersed in conversation, she quietly took a piece of paper from her sleeve and
wiped it off.
      "Uh, thank you," said Musashi. If he had remained silent, no one would
have noticed, but the moment he spoke, every eye went to the crimson stain on
the paper in Yoshino's hand.
      Opening his eyes wide, Mitsuhiro said, "That's blood, isn't it?"
      Yoshino smiled. "No, of course not. It's a petal from a red peony."
