The Broken Lute


       The four or five sticks of wood in the hearth burned softly, giving off a
pleasant aroma and lighting up the small room as if it were noon. The gentle
smoke did not cause the eyes to smart; it looked like white peony petals
billowing in the breeze, flecked now and again with sparks of purple-gold and
crimson. Whenever the fire showed signs of dying down, Yoshino added foot-
long strips of kindling from the scuttle.
       The men were too captivated by the beauty of the flames to ask about the
firewood, but eventually Mitsuhiro said, "What sort of wood are you using? It's
not pine."
       "No," replied Yoshino. "It's peony wood."
       They were mildly surprised, for the peony, with its thin, bushy branches,
hardly seemed suitable for firewood. Yoshino took a stick that had been only
slightly charred and handed it to Mitsuhiro.
       She told them that the peony stumps in the garden had been planted more
than a hundred years earlier. At the beginning of winter, the gardeners pruned
them very closely, cutting off the worm-eaten upper parts. The trimmings were
saved for firewood. Though the quantity was small, it was sufficient for Yoshino.
       The peony, remarked Yoshino, was the king of flowers. Perhaps it was
only natural that its withered branches had a quality not to be found in ordinary
wood, just as certain men had a worth not displayed by others. "How many men
are there," she mused, "whose merit endures after the blossoms have faded and
died?" With a melancholy smile, she answered her own question. "We human
beings blossom only during our youth, then become dry, odorless skeletons even
before we die."
       A little later, Yoshino said, "I'm sorry I have nothing more to offer you
than the sake and the fire, but at least there's wood, enough to last until sunrise."
       "You shouldn't apologize. This is a feast fit for a prince." Shōyū, though
accustomed to luxury, was sincere in his praise.
       "There is one thing I'd like you to do for me," said Yoshino. "Will you
please write a memento of this evening?"
       While she was rubbing the ink stone, the girls spread a woolen rug in the
next room and laid out several pieces of Chinese writing paper. Being made of

bamboo and paper mulberry, it was tough and absorbent, just right for
calligraphic inscriptions.
       Mitsuhiro, assuming the role of host, turned to Takuan and said, "Good
priest, since the lady requests it, will you write something appropriate? Or
perhaps we should first ask Kōetsu?"
       Kōetsu moved silently on his knees. He took up the brush, thought for a
moment and drew a peony blossom.
       Above this, Takuan wrote:


           Why should I cling to
           A life so far removed from
           Beauty and passion?
           Peonies though lovely
           Shed their bright petals and die.

     Takuan's poem was in the Japanese style. Mitsuhiro chose to write in the
Chinese manner, setting down lines from a poem by Tsai Wen:


           When I am busy, the mountain looks at me.
           When I am at leisure, I look at the mountain.
           Though it seems the same, it is not the same,
           For busyness is inferior to leisure.


      Under Takuan's poem, Yoshino wrote:


           Even as they bloom
           A breath of sadness hangs
           Over the flowers.
           Do they think of the future,
           When their petals will be gone?


      Shōyū and Musashi looked on in silence, the latter greatly relieved when

no one insisted that he write something too.
       They returned to the hearth and chatted for a while, until Shōyū, noticing a
Biwa, a kind of lute, next to the alcove in the inner room, asked Yoshino to play
for them. The others seconded his suggestion.
       Yoshino, displaying no trace of timidity, took up the instrument and sat
down in the middle of the dimly lit inner room. Her manner was not that of a
virtuoso proud of her skills, nor did she attempt to be unduly modest. The men
cleared their minds of random thoughts, the better to give their attention to her
rendition of a section from Tales of the Heike. Soft, gentle tones gave way to a
turbulent passage, then to staccato chords. The fire dwindled and the room
darkened. Entranced by the music, no one stirred until a tiny explosion of sparks
brought them back to earth.
       As the music ended, Yoshino said, with a slight smile, "I'm afraid I didn't
play very well." She replaced the lute and returned to the fire. When the men
stood up to take their leave, Musashi, happy to be saved from further boredom,
was the first to reach the door. Yoshino said farewell to the others one by one but
said nothing to him. As he turned to go, she quietly took hold of his sleeve.
       "Musashi, spend the night here. Somehow ... I don't want to let you go
home."
       The face of an importuned virgin couldn't have been redder. He tried to
cover up by pretending not to hear, but it was plain to the others that he was too
flustered to speak.
       Turning to Shōyū, Yoshino said, "It'll be all right if I keep him here, won't
it?"
       Musashi removed Yoshino's hand from his sleeve. "No, I'm going with
Kōetsu."
       As he made hastily for the door, Kōetsu stopped him. "Don't be like that,
Musashi. Why don't you stay here tonight? You can come back to my house
tomorrow. After all, the lady has been kind enough to show her concern for
you." He pointedly went to join the other two men.
       Musashi's cautiousness warned him that they were deliberately trying to
trick him into staying for what laughs they might derive from it later. Still, the
seriousness he saw written on the faces of Yoshino and Kōetsu argued against its
being only a joke.
       Shōyū and Mitsuhiro, vastly amused by his discomfort, persisted in teasing
him, one saying, "You're the most fortunate man in the country," and the other
volunteering to stay in his stead.

        The joking stopped with the arrival of a man Yoshino had sent out to take a
look around the quarter. He was breathing heavily, and his teeth were chattering
with fright.
        "The other gentlemen can leave," he said, "but Musashi shouldn't think of
it. Only the main gate is open now, and on either side of it, around the Amigasa
teahouse and along the street, are swarms of samurai, heavily armed, roaming
around in small bands. They're from the Yoshioka School. The tradesmen are
afraid something awful might happen, so they all closed early. Beyond the
quarter, toward the riding ground, I was told there are at least a hundred men."
        The men were impressed, not only by the report but by the fact that
Yoshino had taken such a precaution. Only Kōetsu had any inkling that some
incident might have occurred.
        Yoshino had guessed something was afoot when she saw the spot of blood
on Musashi's sleeve.
        "Musashi," she said, "now that you've heard what it's like out there, you
may be more determined than ever to leave, just to prove you're not afraid. But
please don't do anything rash. If your enemies think you're a coward, you can
always prove to them tomorrow that you aren't. Tonight, you came here to relax,
and it's the mark of a real man to enjoy himself to his heart's content. The
Yoshiokas want to kill you. Certainly it's no disgrace to avoid that. In fact, many
people would condemn you for poor judgment if you insisted on walking into
their trap.
        "There's the matter of your personal honor, of course, but please stop to
consider the trouble a battle would cause to the people in the quarter. Your
friends' lives would be endangered too. Under the circumstances, the only wise
thing for you to do is stay here."
        Without waiting for his reply, she turned to the other men and said, "I think
it's all right for the rest of you to go, if you're careful along the way."


       A couple of hours later, the clock struck four. The distant sound of music
       and singing had died out. Musashi was seated on the threshold of the
hearth
       room, a lonely prisoner waiting for the dawn. Yoshino remained by the
fire. "Aren't you cold there?" she asked. "Do come over here, where it's warm."
"Never mind me. Go to bed. When the sun comes up, I'll let myself out." The
same words had been exchanged quite a number of times already, but

       to no effect.
       Despite Musashi's lack of polish, Yoshino was attracted to him. Though it
had been said that a woman who thought of men as men, rather than as sources
of income, had no business seeking employment in the gay quarters, this was
merely a cliché repeated by the patrons of brothels—men who knew only
common prostitutes and had no contact with the great courtesans. Women of
Yoshino's breeding and training were quite capable of infatuation. She was only
a year or two older than Musashi, but how different they were in their experience
of love. Watching him sit so stiffly, restraining his emotions, avoiding her face as
though a look at her might blind him, she felt once again like a sheltered maiden
experiencing the first pangs of love.
       The attendants, ignorant of the psychological tension, had spread luxurious
pallets, fit for the son and daughter of a daimyō, in the adjoining room. Little
golden bells gleamed softly on the corners of the satin pillows.
       The sound of snow sliding off the roof was not unlike that of a man
jumping down from the fence into the garden. Each time he heard it, Musashi
bristled like a hedgehog. His nerves seemed to reach to the very tips of his hair.
       Yoshino felt a shiver run through her. It was the coldest part of the night,
the hour just before dawn, yet her discomfort was not due to the cold. It came
from the sight of this fierce man and clashed in an intricate rhythm with her
natural attraction to him.
       The kettle over the fire began to whistle, a cheerful sound that calmed her.
Quietly she poured some tea.
       "It'll be daylight soon. Have a cup of tea and warm yourself by the fire."
"Thank you," said Musashi, without moving.
       "It's ready now," she said again, and gave up trying. The last thing she
wanted to do was make a nuisance of herself. Still, she was slightly offended at
seeing the tea go to waste. After it was too cold to drink, she poured it into a
small pail kept for that purpose. What is the use, she thought, of offering tea to a
rustic like him, for whom the niceties of tea-drinking have no meaning?
      Though his back was to her, she could see that his whole body was as taut
      as steel armor. Her eyes grew sympathetic.
      "Musashi."
      "What?"
      "Who are you on guard against?"
      "No one. I'm just trying to keep myself from relaxing too much." "Because
      of your enemies?"

     "Of course."
      "In your present state, if you were suddenly attacked in force, you'd be
killed immediately. I'm sure of it, and it makes me sad."
      He did not answer.
      "A woman like myself knows nothing of the Art of War, but from
watching you tonight, I have the terrible feeling I've seen a man who was about
to be cut down. Somehow there's the shadow of death about you. Is that really
safe for a warrior who may at any minute have to face dozens of swords? Can
such a man expect to win?"
     The question sounded sympathetic, but it unsettled him. He whirled around,
     moved to the hearth and sat facing her.
     "Are you saying I'm immature?"
     "Did I make you angry?"
      "Nothing a woman ever said would make me angry. But I am interested in
knowing why you think I act like a man who's about to be killed."
      He was painfully conscious of the web of swords and strategies and
maledictions being woven around him by the Yoshioka partisans. He had
anticipated an attempt at revenge, and in the courtyard of the Rengeōin, had
considered going away to hide. But this would have been rude to Kōetsu and
would have meant breaking his promise to Rin'ya. Far more decisive, however,
was his desire not to be accused of running away because he was afraid.
      After returning to the Ōgiya, he thought he had displayed an admirable
degree of composure. Now Yoshino was laughing at his immaturity. This would
not have upset him had she been bantering in the fashion of courtesans, but she
seemed perfectly serious.
      He professed not to be angry, but his eyes were as keen as sword tips. He
stared straight into her white face. "Explain what you said." When she did not
answer immediately, he said, "Or maybe you were just joking."
      Her dimples, which had deserted her for a moment, reappeared. "How can
you say that?" She laughed, shaking her head. "Do you think I'd joke about
something so serious to a warrior?"
     "Well, what did you mean? Tell me!"
     "All right. Since you seem so eager to know, I'll try to explain. Were you
     listening when I played the lute?"
     "What does that have to do with it?"
      "Perhaps it was foolish of me to ask. Tense as you are, your ears could
hardly have taken in the fine, subtle tones of the music."

       "No, that's not true. I was listening."
       "Did it occur to you to wonder how all those complicated combinations of
soft and loud tones, weak and strong phrases, could be produced from only four
strings?"
       "I was listening to the story. What else was there to hear?"
       "Many people do that, but I'd like to draw a comparison between the lute
and a human being. Rather than go into the technique of playing, let me recite a
poem by Po Chü-i in which he describes the sounds of the lute. I feel sure you
know it."
       She wrinkled her brow slightly as she intoned the poem in a low voice, her
style somewhere between singing and speaking.


      The large strings hummed like rain,
      The small strings whispered like a secret,
      Hummed, whispered—and then were intermingled
      Like a pouring of large and small pearls into a plate of jade.
      We heard an oriole, liquid, hidden among flowers.
      We heard a brook bitterly sob along a bank of sand...
      By the checking of its cold touch, the very string seemed broken
      As though it could not pass; and the notes, dying away
      Into a depth of sorrow and concealment of lament,
      Told even more in silence than they had told in sound...
      A silver vase abruptly broke with a gush of water,
      And out leapt armored horses and weapons that clashed and smote—
      And before she laid her pick down, she ended with one stroke,
      And all four strings made one sound, as of rending silk.


      "And so, you see, one simple lute can produce an infinite variety of
tonalities. Since the days when I was an apprentice, this puzzled me. Finally, I
broke a lute apart to see what was inside. Then I attempted to make one myself.
After trying a number of things, I finally understood that the secret of the
instrument is in its heart."
      Breaking off, she went and got the lute from the next room. Once reseated,
she held the instrument by the neck and stood it up in front of him.
      "If you examine the heart inside, you can see why the tonal variations are

possible." Taking a fine, keen knife in her lithe hand, she brought it down
quickly and sharply on the pear-shaped back of the lute. Three or four deft
strokes and the work was done, so quickly and decisively that Musashi half
expected to see blood spurt from the instrument. He even felt a slight twinge of
pain, as though the blade had nicked his own flesh. Placing the knife behind her,
Yoshino held the lute up so he could see its structure.
       Looking first at her face, then at the broken lute, he wondered whether she
actually possessed the element of violence seemingly displayed in her handling
of the weapon. The smarting pain from the screech of the cuts lingered.
       "As you can see," she said, "the inside of the lute is almost completely
hollow. All the variations come from this single crosspiece near the middle. This
one piece of wood is the instrument's bones, its vital organs, its heart. If it were
absolutely straight and rigid, the sound would be monotonous, but in fact it has
been shaved into a curved shape. This alone would not create the lute's infinite
variety. That comes from leaving the crosspiece a certain amount of leeway to
vibrate at either end. To put it another way, the tonal richness comes from there
being a certain freedom of movement a certain relaxation, at the ends of the core.
       "It's the same with people. In life, we must have flexibility. Our spirits
must be able to move freely. To be too stiff and rigid is to be brittle and lacking
in responsiveness."
       His eyes did not move from the lute, nor did his lips open.
       "This much," she continued, "should be obvious to anybody, but isn't it
characteristic of people to become rigid? With one stroke of the pick, I can make
the four strings of the lute sound like a lance, like a sword, like the rending of a
cloud, because of the fine balance between firmness and flexibility in the
wooden core. Tonight, when I first saw you, I could detect no trace of flexibility
—only stiff, unyielding rigidity. If the crosspiece were as taut and unbending as
you are, one stroke of the pick would break a string, perhaps even the sounding
board itself. It may have been presumptuous of me to say what I did, but I was
worried about you. I wasn't joking or making fun of you. Do you understand
that?"
       A cock crowed in the distance. Sunlight, reflected by the snow, came
through the slits in the rain shutters. Musashi sat and stared at the maimed body
of the lute and the chips of wood on the floor. The crow of the cock escaped him.
He did not notice the sunlight.
       "Oh," said Yoshino, "it's daylight." She seemed sorry that the night had
passed. She reached out her hand for more firewood before realizing there was

none.
       The sounds of morning—doors rattling open, the twitter of birds—
infiltrated the room, but Yoshino made no move to open the rain shutters.
Though the fire was cold, the blood coursed warmly in her veins.
       The young girls who waited on her knew better than to open the door to
her little house until they were summoned.
