The Withered Field



      The swordsmen from the Yoshioka School assembled in a barren field
overlooking the Nagasaka entrance to the Tamba highroad. Beyond the trees
edging the field, the glistening of the snow in the mountains northwest of Kyoto
struck the eye like lightning.
      One of the men suggested making a fire, pointing out that their sheathed
swords seemed to act like conduits, transmitting the cold directly to their bodies.
It was the very beginning of spring, the ninth day of the new year. A frigid wind
blew down from Mount Kinugasa and even the birds sounded forlorn.
      "Burns nice, doesn't it?"
      "Um. Better be careful. Don't want to start a brush fire."
      The crackling fire warmed their hands and faces, but before long, Ueda
Ryōhei, waving smoke from his eyes, grumbled, "It's too hot!" Glaring at a man
who was about to throw more leaves on the fire, he said, "That's enough! Stop!"
     An hour passed uneventfully.
     "It must be past six o'clock already."
     To a man, without giving it a thought, they lifted their eves toward the sun.
     "Closer to seven."
     "The Young Master should be here by now."
     "Oh, he'll show up any minute."
     Faces tense, they anxiously watched the road from town; not a few were
     swallowing nervously.
     "What could have happened to him?"
      A cow lowed, breaking the silence. The field had once been used as
pasture for the Emperor's cows, and there were still untended cows in the
vicinity. The sun rose higher, bringing with it warmth and the odor of manure
and dried grass.
     "Don't you suppose Musashi's already at the field by the Rendaiji?"
     "He may be."
     "Somebody go and take a look. It's only about six hundred yards."
     No one was eager to do this; they lapsed into silence again, their faces
     smoldering in the shadows cast by the smoke.

      "There's no misunderstanding about the arrangements, is there?"
      "No. Ueda got it directly from the Young Master last night. There couldn't
      be any mistake."
       Ryōhei confirmed this. "That's right. I wouldn't be surprised if Musashi's
there already, but maybe the Young Master's deliberately coming late to make
Musashi nervous. Let's wait. If we make a false move and give people the
impression we're going to the aid of the Young Master, it'll disgrace the school.
We can't do anything until he arrives. What's Musashi anyway? Just a rōnin. He
can't be that good."
       The students who had seen Musashi in action at the Yoshioka dōjō the
previous year knew otherwise, but even to them it was unthinkable that Seijūrō
would lose. The consensus was that though their master was bound to win,
accidents do happen. Moreover, since the fight had been publicly announced,
there would be a lot of spectators, whose presence, they felt, would not only add
to the prestige of the school but enhance the personal reputation of their teacher.
       Despite Seijūrō's specific instructions that they were under no
circumstances to assist him, forty of them had gathered here to await his arrival,
give him a rousing send-off, and be on hand—just in case. Besides Ueda, five of
the other Ten Swordsmen of the House of Yoshioka were present.
      It was now past seven, and as the spirit of calm enjoined upon them by
      Ryōhei gave way to boredom, they mumbled discontentedly.
      Spectators on their way to the bout were asking if there had been some
      mistake.
      "Where's Musashi?"
      "Where's the other one—Seijūrō?"
      "Who are all those samurai?"
      "Probably here to second one side or the other."
      "Strange way to have a duel! The seconds are here, the principals aren't."
       Though the crowd grew bigger and the buzz of voices louder, the
onlookers were too prudent to approach the Yoshioka students, who, for their
part, took no notice of the heads peering through the withered miscanthus or
looking down from tree branches.
       Jōtarō padded around in the midst of the mob, leaving a trail of little puffs
of dust. Carrying his larger-than-life wooden sword and wearing sandals too big
for him, he was going from woman to woman, checking one face after another.
"Not here, not here," he murmured. "What could have happened to Otsū? She
knows about the fight today." She had to be here, he thought. Musashi might be

in danger. What could possibly keep her away?
       But his search was fruitless, though he trudged about until he was dead
tired. "It's so strange," he thought. "I haven't seen her since New Year's Day. I
wonder if she's sick.... That old hag she went away with talked nice, but maybe it
was a trick. Maybe she's done something awful to Otsū."
       This worried him terribly, far more than the outcome of today's bout. He
had no misgivings about that. Of the hundreds of people in the crowd, there was
hardly one who did not expect Seijūrō to win. Only Jōtarō was sustained by
unshakable faith in Musashi. Before his eyes was a vision of his teacher facing
the lances of the Hōzōin priests at Hannya Plain.
       Finally, he stopped in the middle of the field. "There's something else
strange," he mused. "Why are all these people here? According to the sign, the
fight is to take place in the field by the Rendaiji." He seemed to be the only
person puzzled by this.
       Out of the milling crowd came a surly voice. "You there, boy! Look here!"
Jōtarō recognized the man; he was the one who had been watching Musashi and
Akemi whispering on the bridge on New Year's morning.
       "What do you want, mister?" asked Jōtarō.
       Sasaki Kojirō came up to him, but before speaking, slowly eyed him from
head to toe. "Didn't I see you on Gojō Avenue recently?"
      "Oh, so you remember."
      "You were with a young woman."
      "Yes. That was Otsū."
      "Is that her name? Tell me, does she have some connection with Musashi?"
      "I should say so."
      "Is she his cousin?"
      "Unh-unh."
      "Sister?"
      "Unh-unh."
      "Well?"
      "She likes him."
      "Are they lovers?"
      "I don't know. I'm only his pupil." Jōtarō nodded his head proudly.
      "So that's why you're here. Look, the crowd's getting restless. You must
      know where Musashi is. Has he left his inn?"
      "Why ask me? I haven't seen him for a long time."
      Several men pushed their way through the crowd and approached Kojirō.

      He turned a hawklike eye on them.
      "Ah, so there you are, Sasaki!"
      "Why, it's Ryōhei."
       "Where've you been all this time?" Ryōhei demanded, grabbing Kojirō's
hand as though taking him prisoner. "You haven't been to the dōjō for more than
ten days. The Young Master wanted to get in some practice with you."
      "So what if I stayed away? I'm here today."
      Placing themselves discreetly around Kojirō, Ryōhei and his comrades led
      him off to their fire.
      The whisper went around among those who had seen Kojirō's long sword
      and his flashy outfit. "That's Musashi, for sure!"
      "Is that him?"
      "It must be."
      "Pretty loud clothing he's got on. He doesn't look weak, though."
       "That's not Musashi!" Jōtarō cried disdainfully. "Musashi's not like that at
all! You'd never catch him dressed up like a Kabuki actor!"
       Presently even those who could not hear the boy's protest realized their
mistake and went back to wondering what was going on.
       Kojirō was standing with the Yoshioka students, regarding them with
obvious contempt. They listened to him in silence, but their faces were sullen.
       "It was a blessing in disguise for the House of Yoshioka that neither
Seijūrō nor Musashi arrived on time," said Kojirō. "What you'd better do is split
up into groups, head Seijūrō off and take him home quickly before he gets hurt."
       This cowardly proposal enraged them, but he went further. "What I'm
advising would do Seijūrō more good than any assistance he could possibly get
from you." Then, rather grandly: "Heaven sent me here as a messenger for the
sake of the House of Yoshioka. I shall give you my prediction: if they fight,
Seijūrō will lose. I'm sorry to have to say this, but Musashi will certainly defeat
him, maybe kill him."
       Miike Jūrōzaemon thrust his chest against the younger man's and shouted,
"That's an insult." His right elbow between his own face and Kojirō's, he was
prepared to draw and strike.
      Kojirō looked down and grinned, "I take it you don't like what I said."
      "Ugh!"
      "In that case, I'm sorry," said Kojirō blithely. "I won't attempt to be of
      further assistance."
      "Nobody asked for your help in the first place."

       "That's not quite right. If you had no need of my support, why did you
insist that I come from Kema to your house? Why were you trying so hard to
keep me happy? You, Seijūrō, all of you!"
       "We were simply being polite to a guest. You think a lot of yourself, don't
you?"
       "Ha, ha, ha, ha! Let's stop all this, before it ends up with my having to
fight all of you. But I warn you, if you don't heed my prophecy, you'll regret it!
I've compared the two men with my own eyes, and I say the chances Seijūrō will
lose are overwhelming. Musashi was at the Gojō Avenue bridge on New Year's
morning. As soon as I laid eyes on him, I knew there was danger. To me, that
sign you put up looks more like an announcement of mourning for the House of
Yoshioka. It's very sad, but it seems to be the way of the world that people never
realize when they're finished."
       "That's enough! Why come here if your only purpose is to talk like that?"
       Kojirō's tone became snide. "It also seems to be typical of people on the
way down that they won't accept an act of kindness in the spirit in which it's
offered. Go on! Think what you like! You won't even have to wait the day out.
You'll know in an hour or less how wrong you are."
       "Yech!" Jūrōzaemon spat at Kojirō. Forty men moved a step forward, their
anger radiating darkly over the field.
       Kojirō reacted with self-assurance. Jumping quickly to one side, he
demonstrated by his stance that if they were looking for a fight, he was ready.
The goodwill he had professed earlier now seemed a sham. An observer might
well have asked if he wasn't using mob psychology to create an opportunity for
himself to steal the show from Musashi and Seijūrō.
       A stir of excitement spread through those close enough to see. This was
not the fight they had come to watch, but it promised to be a good one.
       Into the midst of this murder-charged atmosphere ran a young girl.
Speeding along behind her like a rolling ball was a small monkey. She rushed in
between Kojirō and the Yoshioka swordsmen and screamed, "Kojirō! Where's
Musashi! Isn't he here?"
       Kojirō turned on her angrily. "What is this?" he demanded.
       "Akemi!" said one of the samurai. "What's she doing here?"
       "Why did you come?" Kojirō snapped. "Didn't I tell you not to?" "I'm not
your private property! Why can't I be here?"
       "Shut up! And get out of here! Go on back to the Zuzuya," shouted Kojirō,
pushing her away gently.

       Akemi, panting heavily, shook her head adamantly. "Don't order me
around! I stayed with you, but I don't belong to you. I—" She choked and began
to sob noisily. "How can you tell me what to do after what you did to me? After
tying me up and leaving me on the second floor of the inn? After bullying and
torturing me when I said I was worried about Musashi?"
       Kojirō opened his mouth, ready to speak, but Akemi didn't give him the
chance. "One of the neighbors heard me scream and came and untied me. I'm
here to see Musashi!"
       "Are you out of your mind? Can't you see the people around you? Shut
up!"
       "I won't! I don't care who hears. You said Musashi would be killed today—
if Seijūrō couldn't handle him, you'd act as his second and kill Musashi yourself.
Maybe I'm crazy, but Musashi's the only man in my heart! I must see him.
Where is he?"
       Kojirō clicked his tongue but was speechless before her vitriolic attack.
       To the Yoshioka men, Akemi seemed too distraught to be believed. But
maybe there was some truth in what she said. And if there was, Kojirō had used
kindness as a lure, then tortured her for his own pleasure.
       Embarrassed, Kojirō glared at her with unconcealed hate.
       Suddenly their attention was diverted by one of Seijūrō's attendants, a
youth by the name of Tamihachi. He was running like a wild man, waving his
arms and shouting. "Help! It's the Young Master! He's met Musashi. He's
injured! Oh, it's awful! A-w-w-ful!"
      "What're you babbling about?"
      "The Young Master? Musashi?"
      "Where? When?"
      "Tamihachi, are you telling the truth?"
      Shrill questions poured from faces suddenly drained of blood.
       Tamihachi went on screaming inarticulately. Neither answering their
questions nor pausing to catch his breath, he ran stumbling back to the Tamba
highroad. Half believing, half doubting, not really knowing what to think, Ueda,
Jūrōzaemon and the others chased after him like wild beasts charging across a
burning plain.
       Running north about five hundred yards, they came to a barren field
stretching out beyond the trees to the right, quietly basking in the spring
sunlight, on the surface serene and undisturbed. Thrushes and shrikes, chirping
as though nothing had happened, hastily took to the air as Tamihachi scrambled

wildly through the grass. He climbed up a knoll that looked like an ancient burial
mound and fell to his knees. Clutching at the earth, he moaned and screamed,
"Young Master!"
       The others caught up with him, then stood nailed to the ground, gaping at
the sight before their eyes. Seijūrō, clad in a kimono with a blue flowered
design, a leather strap holding back his sleeves and a white cloth tied around his
head, lay with his face buried in the grass.
       "Young Master!"
       "We're here! What happened?"
       There was not a drop of blood on the white headband, nor on his sleeve or
the grass around him, but his eyes and forehead were frozen in an expression of
excruciating pain. His lips were the color of wild grapes.
      "Is ... is he breathing?"
      "Barely."
      "Quick, pick him up!"
      One man knelt and took hold of Seijūrō's right arm, ready to lift him.
      Seijūrō screamed in agony.
      "Find something to carry him on! Anything!"
       Three or four men, shouting confusedly, ran down the road to a farmhouse
and came back with a rain shutter. They gently rolled Seijūrō onto it, but though
he seemed to revive a little, he was still writhing in pain. To keep him quiet,
several men removed their obis and tied him to the shutter.
       With one man at each corner, they lifted him up and began walking in
funereal silence.
       Seijūrō kicked violently, almost breaking the shutter. "Musashi ... is he
gone? ... Oh, it hurts! ... Right arm—shoulder. The bone ... O-w-w-w! .. . Can't
stand it. Cut it off! ... Can't you hear? Cut the arm off!"
       The horror of his pain caused the men carrying the improvised stretcher to
avert their eyes. This was the man they respected as their teacher; it seemed
indecent to look at him in this condition.
       Pausing, they called back to Ueda and Jūrōzaemon. "He's in terrible pain,
asking us to cut off his arm. Wouldn't it be easier on him if we did?"
       "Don't talk like fools," roared Ryōhei. "Of course it's painful, but he won't
die from that. If we cut his arm off and can't stop the bleeding, it'll be the end of
him. What we've got to do is get him home and see how badly he's injured. If the
arm has to come off, we can do it after proper steps have been taken to keep him
from bleeding to death. A couple of you go on ahead and bring the doctor to the

school."
       There were still a lot of people about, standing silently behind the pine
trees along the road. Annoyed, Ryōhei scowled blackly and turned to the men
behind him. "Chase those people away," he ordered. "The Young Master's not a
spectacle to be stared at."
       Most of the samurai, grateful for a chance to work off their pent-up anger,
took off on the run, making vicious gestures at the onlookers. The latter scattered
like locusts.
      "Tamihachi, come here!" called Ryōhei angrily, as if blaming the young
      attendant for what had happened.
      The youth, who had been walking tearfully beside the stretcher, shrank in
      terror. "Wh-what is it?" he stammered.
      "Were you with the Young Master when he left the house?"
      "Y-y-yes."
      "Where did he make his preparations?"
      "Here, after we reached the field."
      "He must have known where we were waiting. Why didn't he go there
      first?"
      "I don't know."
      "Was Musashi already there?"
      "He was standing on the knoll where ... where ... "
      "Was he alone?"
      "Yes."
      "How did it go? Did you just stand there and watch?"
       "The Young Master looked straight at me and said ... he said if by any
chance he should lose, I was to pick up his body and take it to the other field. He
said you and the others had been there since dawn, but I wasn't under any
circumstances to let anyone know anything until the bout was over. He said there
were times when a student of the Art of War had no choice but to risk defeat, and
he didn't want to win by dishonorable, cowardly means. After that, he went
forward to meet Musashi." Tamihachi spoke rapidly, relieved to get the story
told.
       "Then what?"
       "I could see Musashi's face. He seemed to be smiling slightly. The two of
them exchanged some sort of greeting. Then ... then there was a scream. It
carried from one end of the field to the other. I saw the Young Master's wooden
sword fly into the air, and then ... only Musashi was standing. He had on an

orange headband, but his hair was on end."
       The road had been cleared of the curious. The men carrying the shutter
were dejected and subdued but kept scrupulously in step so as to avoid causing
further pain to the injured man.
       "What's that?"
       They halted, and one of the men in front raised his free hand to his neck.
Another looked up at the sky. Dead pine needles were fluttering down on
Seijūrō. Perched on a limb above them was Kojirō's monkey, staring vacantly
and making obscene gestures.
       "Ouch!" cried one of the men as a pine cone struck his upturned face.
Cursing, he whipped his stiletto from his scabbard and sent it flying with a flash
of light at the monkey, but missed his target.
       At the sound of his master's whistle, the monkey somersaulted and
bounced lightly onto his shoulder. Kojirō was standing in the shadows, Akemi at
his side. While the Yoshioka men directed resentful eyes at him, Kojirō stared
fixedly at the body on the rain shutter. His supercilious smile had deserted his
face, which now bore a look of reverence. He grimaced at Seijūrō's agonized
moans. With his recent lecture still fresh in mind, the samurai could only assume
that he had come to have the last laugh.
       Ryōhei urged the stretcher bearers on, saying, "It's only a monkey, not
even a human being. Forget it, get moving."
       "Wait," Kojirō said, then went to Seijūrō's side and spoke directly to him.
"What happened?" he asked, but did not wait for an answer. "Musashi got the
better of you, didn't he? Where did he hit you? Right shoulder? ... Oh, this is bad.
The bone's shattered. Your arm's like a sack of gravel. You shouldn't be lying on
your back, being bounced along on the shutter. The blood might go to your
brain."
       Turning to the others, he commanded arrogantly, "Put him down! Go
ahead, put him down! ... What are you waiting for? Do as I say!"
       Seijūrō seemed on the verge of death, but Kojirō ordered him to stand up.
"You can if you try. The wound isn't all that serious. It's only your right arm. If
you try walking, you can do it. You've still got the use of your left arm. Forget
about yourself! Think of your dead father. You owe him more respect than you're
showing now, a lot more. Being carried through the streets of Kyoto—what a
sight that would be. Think what it would do to your father's good name!"
       Seijūrō stared at him, his eyes white and bloodless. Then with one quick
motion, he lifted himself to his feet. His useless right arm looked a foot longer

than his left.
      "Miike!" cried Seijūrō.
      "Yes, sir."
      "Cut it off!"
      "Huh-h-h!"
      "Don't just stand there! Cut off my arm!"
      "But ..."
      "You gutless idiot! Here, Ueda, cut it off! Right now!"
      "Y-y-yes, sir."
      But before Ueda moved, Kojirō said, "I'll do it if you want."
      "Please!" said Seijūrō.
       Kojirō went to his side. Grasping Seijūrō's hand firmly, he lifted the arm
high, at the same time unsheathing his small sword. With a quick, startling
sound, the arm fell to the ground, and blood spurted from the stump.
       When Seijūrō staggered, his students rushed to his support and covered the
wound with cloth to stop the blood.
       "From now on I'll walk," said Seijūrō. "I'll walk home on my own two
feet." His face waxen, he took ten steps. Behind him, the blood dripping from
the wound oozed blackly into the ground.
       "Young Master, be careful!"
       His disciples clung to him like hoops to a barrel, their voices filled with
solicitude, which turned rapidly to anger.
       One of them cursed Kojirō, saying, "Why did that conceited ass have to
butt in? You'd have been better off the way you were."
       But Seijūrō, shamed by Kojirō's words, said, "I said I'll walk, and walk I
will!" After a short pause, he proceeded another twenty paces, carried more by
his willpower than by his legs. But he could not hold on for long; after fifty or
sixty yards, he collapsed.
       "Quick! We've got to get him to the doctor."
       They picked him up and made quickly for Shijō Avenue. Seijūrō no longer
had the strength to object.
       Kojirō stood for a time under a tree, watching grimly. Then, turning to
Akemi, he said with a smirk, "Did you see that? I imagine it made you feel good,
didn't it?" Her face deadly white, Akemi regarded his sneer with loathing, but he
went on. "You've done nothing but talk about how you'd like to get back at him.
Are you satisfied now? Is this enough revenge for your lost virginity?"
       Akemi was too confused to speak. Kojirō seemed at this moment more

frightening, more hateful, more evil than Seijūrō. Though Seijūrō was the cause
of her troubles, he was not a wicked man. He was not blackhearted, not a real
villain. Kojirō, on the other hand, was genuinely evil—not the type of sinner
most people envisioned but a twisted, perverse fiend, who, far from rejoicing in
the happiness of others, delighted in standing by and watching them suffer. He
would never steal or cheat, yet he was more dangerous by far than the ordinary
crook.
       "Let's go home," he said, putting the monkey back on his shoulder. Akemi
longed to flee but could not muster the courage. "It won't do you any good to go
on looking for Musashi," mumbled Kojirō, talking to himself as much as to her.
"There's no reason for him to linger around here."
       Akemi asked herself why she did not take this opportunity to make a dash
for freedom, why she seemed unable to leave this brute. But even as she cursed
her own stupidity, she could not prevent herself from going with him.
       The monkey turned its head and looked at her. Chattering derisively, it
bared its white teeth in a broad grin.
       Akemi wanted to scold it, but couldn't. She felt she and the monkey were
bound together by the same fate. She recalled how pitiful Seijūrō had looked,
and despite herself, her heart went out to him. She despised men like Seijūrō and
Kojirō, and yet she was drawn to them like a moth to a red-hot flame.
