A Sickness of the Heart


       Within two days, the snow had melted, and warm spring breezes were
encouraging a myriad of fresh buds to swell to their fullest. The sun was strong
and even cotton garments were uncomfortable.
       A young Zen monk, mud spattered up the back of his kimono as high as
the waist, stood before the entrance of Lord Karasumaru's residence. Getting no
answer to his repeated calls for admission, he walked around to the servants'
quarters and stood on tiptoe to peek through a window.
       "What is it, priest?" asked Jōtarō.
       The monk whirled around and his mouth fell open. He couldn't imagine
what such a ragamuffin could be doing in the courtyard of Karasumaru
Mitsuhiro's house. "If you're begging, you'll have to go around to the kitchen,"
said Jōtarō.
       "I'm not here for alms," replied the monk. He took a letter box from his
kimono. "I'm from the Nansōji in Izumi Province. This letter is for Takuan Sōhō,
and I understand he's staying here. Are you one of the delivery boys?"
       "Of course not. I'm a guest, like Takuan."
       "Is that so? In that case, would you please tell Takuan I'm here?" "Wait
here. I'll call him."
       As he jumped into the entrance hall, Jōtarō tripped over the foot of a
standing screen and the tangerines cradled in his kimono tumbled to the floor.
Retrieving them rapidly, he sped off toward the inner rooms.
     He came back a few minutes later to inform the monk that Takuan was out.
     "They say he's over at the Daitokuji."
     "Do you know when he'll be back?"
     "They said 'pretty soon.' "
     "Is there someplace I could wait without inconveniencing anyone?"
       Jōtarō bounded into the courtyard and led the monk straight to the barn.
"You can wait here," he said. "You won't be in anybody's way."
       The barn was littered with straw, cart wheels, cow manure and a variety of
other things, but before the priest could say anything, Jōtarō was running across
the garden toward a small house at the west end of the compound.
       "Otsū!" he cried. "I've brought you some tangerines."

       Lord Karasumaru's doctor had told Otsū there was nothing to worry about.
She believed him, though she herself could tell how thin she was just by putting
her hand to her face. Her fever persisted and her appetite had not returned, but
this morning she had murmured to Jōtarō that she would like a tangerine.
       Leaving his post at her bedside, he went first to the kitchen, only to learn
there were no tangerines in the house. Finding none at the greengrocers or other
food shops, he went to the open marketplace in Kyōgoku. A wide variety of
goods was available there—silk thread, cotton goods, lamp oil, furs and so on—
but no tangerines. After he left the market, his hopes were raised a couple of
times by the sight of orange-colored fruit beyond the walls of private gardens—
bitter oranges and quinces, as it turned out.
       Having covered nearly half of the city, he met with success only by turning
thief. The offering in front of the Shinto shrine consisted of small piles of
potatoes, carrots and tangerines. He stuffed the fruit into his kimono and glanced
around to make sure no one was watching. Fearful that the outraged god would
materialize at any minute, he prayed all the way back to the Karasumaru house:
"Please don't punish me. I'm not going to eat them myself."
       He lined the tangerines up in a row, offered Otsū one and peeled it for her.
She turned away, refusing to touch it.
       "What's the matter?"
       When he leaned forward to look at her face, she buried her head deeper in
the pillow. "Nothing's the matter," she sobbed.
      "You've started crying again, haven't you?" said Jōtarō, clicking his tongue.
      "I'm sorry."
      "Don't apologize; just eat one of these."
      "Later."
      "Well, eat the one I've peeled, at least. Please."
       "Jō, I appreciate your thoughtfulness, but I can't eat anything just now."
"It's because you cry so much. Why are you so sad?"
      "I'm crying because I'm happy—that you're so good to me."
      "I don't like to see you like this. It makes me want to cry too."
      "I'll stop, I promise. Now will you forgive me?"
      "Only if you eat the tangerine. If you don't eat something, you'll die."
      "Later. You eat this one."
       "Oh, I can't." He swallowed hard, imagining the wrathful eyes of the god.
"Oh, all right, we'll each have one."
      She turned over and began removing the stringy white fibers from the pulp

     with her delicate fingers.
     "Where's Takuan?" she asked absently.
     "They told me he's at the Daitokuji."
     "Is it true he saw Musashi the night before last?"
     "You heard about that?"
     "Yes. I wonder if he told Musashi I'm here."
     "I suppose so."
     "Takuan said he'd invite Musashi to come here one of these days. Did he
     say anything to you about that?"
     "No."
     "I wonder if he's forgotten."
     "Shall I ask him?"
     "Please do," she replied, smiling for the first time. "But don't ask him in
     front of me."
     "Why not?"
      "Takuan's awful. He keeps saying I'm suffering from 'Musashi sickness."'
"If Musashi came, you'd be up and about in no time, wouldn't you?" "Even you
have to say things like that!" But she seemed genuinely happy. "Is Jōtarō there?"
called one of Mitsuhiro's samurai.
      "Here I am."
      "Takuan wants to see you. Come with me."
      "Go and see what he wants," urged Otsū. "And don't forget what we were
talking about. Ask him, won't you?" A tinge of pink crept into her pale cheeks as
she pulled the cover halfway up over her face.
      Takuan was in the sitting room talking with Lord Mitsuhiro. Jōtarō flung
open the sliding door and said, "Did you want me?"
      "Yes. Come in here."
      Mitsuhiro watched the boy with an indulgent smile, ignoring his lack of
manners.
      As Jōtarō sat down, he said to Takuan, "A priest just like you came here a
while ago. He said he was from the Nansōji. Shall I go get him?"
     "Never mind. I know about that already. He was complaining about what a
     wicked little boy you are."
     "Me?"
      "Do you think it's proper to put a guest in the barn and leave him there?"
"He said he wanted to wait someplace where he wouldn't be in anyone's way .
      Mitsuhiro laughed until his knees shook. Recovering his composure almost

immediately, he asked Takuan, "Are you going directly to Tajima, without
returning to Izumi?"
       The priest nodded. "The letter was rather disturbing, so I think I should. I
don't have to make any preparations. I'll leave today."
      "You're going away?" asked Jōtarō.
      "Yes; I must return home as quickly as possible."
      "Why?"
      "I've just heard that my mother's condition is very serious."
       "You have a mother?" The boy couldn't believe his ears.
      "Of course."
      "When are you coming back?"
      "That depends on my mother's health."
      "What ... what am I going to do without you here?" grumbled Jōtarō. "Does
      that mean we won't see you anymore?"
       "Of course not. We'll meet again soon. I've arranged for you two to stay on
here, and I'm counting on you to look after Otsū. Try to make her stop brooding
and get well. What she needs more than medicine is greater fortitude."
      "I'm not strong enough to give her that. She won't get well until she sees
      Musashi."
      "She's a difficult patient, I'll grant you. I don't envy you a traveling
      companion like her."
      "Takuan, where was it you met Musashi?"
       "Well ... " Takuan looked at Lord Mitsuhiro and laughed sheepishly.
"When's he coming here? You said you'd bring him, and that's the only thing
Otsū has thought about since."
       "Musashi?" Mitsuhiro said casually. "Isn't he the rōnin who was with us at
the Ōgiya?"
       Takuan said to Jōtarō, "I haven't forgotten what I told Otsū. On my way
back from the Daitokuji, I stopped in at Kōetsu's house to see if Musashi was
there. Kōetsu hasn't seen him and thinks he must still be at the Ōgiya. He said his
mother was so worried she wrote a letter to Yoshino Dayū asking her to send
Musashi home right away."
       "Oh?" exclaimed Lord Mitsuhiro, raising his eyebrows half in surprise and
half in envy. "So he's still with Yoshino?"
       "It would appear that Musashi's only a man, like any other. Even if they
seem to be different when they're young, they always turn out to be the same."
       "Yoshino's a strange woman. What does she see in that uncouth

swordsman?"
       "I don't pretend to understand her. Nor do I understand Otsū. What it
comes down to is, I don't understand women in general. As far as I'm concerned,
they all seem a little sick. As for Musashi, I suppose it's about time he reached
the springtime of life. His real training starts now, and let's hope that he gets it
through his head that women are more dangerous than swords. Still, other people
can't solve his problems for him, and I see nothing for me to do but leave him
alone."
       A little uncomfortable about having said so much in front of Jōtarō, he
hastened to offer his thanks and bid farewell to his host, requesting him a second
time to allow Otsū and Jōtarō to stay a little longer.
       The old saying that journeys should be commenced in the morning meant
nothing to Takuan. He was ready to depart, and depart he did, though the sun
was well into the west and twilight already descending.
       Jōtarō ran along beside him, pulling at his sleeve. "Please, please, come
back and say a word to Otsū. She's been crying again, and I can't do anything to
cheer her up."
      "Did you two talk about Musashi?"
      "She told me to ask you when he's coming. If he doesn't come, I'm afraid
      she might die."
      "You don't have to worry about her dying. Just leave her alone." "Takuan,
      who's Yoshino Dayū?"
      "Why do you want to know that?"
      "You said Musashi was with her. Didn't you?"
      "Urn. I have no intention of going back and trying to heal Otsū's illness, but
      I want you to tell her something for me."
      "What is it?"
      "Tell her to eat properly."
      "I've told her that a hundred times."
       "You have? Well, that's the best thing she could possibly be told. But if she
won't listen, you may as well give her the whole truth."
       "What's that?"
       "Musashi is infatuated with a courtesan named Yoshino, and he hasn't left
the brothel for two nights and two days. She's a fool to go on loving a man like
that!"
       "That's not true!" protested Jōtarō. "He's my sensei! He's a samurai! He's
not like that. If I told Otsū that, she might commit suicide. You're the one who's a

fool, Takuan. A great big old fool!"
      "Ha, ha, ha!"
      "You have no business saying bad things about Musashi or saying Otsū is
      foolish."
      "You're a good boy, Jōtarō," said the priest, patting him on the head.
       Jōtarō ducked from under his hand. "I've had enough of you, Takuan. I'll
never ask for your help again. I'll find Musashi myself. I'll bring him back to
Otsū!"
      "Do you know where the place is?"
      "No, but I'll find it."
      "Be sassy if you like, but it's not going to be easy for you to find Yoshino's
      place. Shall I tell you how?"
      "Don't bother."
       "Jōtarō, I'm no enemy of Otsū's, nor do I have anything against Musashi.
Far from it! I've been praying for years that both of them would be able to make
good lives for themselves."
       "Then why are you always saying such mean things?"
       "Does it seem that way to you? Maybe you're right. But just at the
moment, both of them are sick people. If Musashi is left alone, his illness will go
away, but Otsū needs help. Being a priest, I've tried to help her. We're supposed
to be able to cure sicknesses of the heart, just as doctors cure illnesses of the
body. Unfortunately, I haven't been able to do anything for her, so I'm giving up.
If she can't realize that her love is one-sided, advising her to eat properly is the
best I can do."
       "Don't worry about it. Otsū is not going to ask a big phony like you for
help."
       "If you don't believe me, go to the Ōgiya in Yanagimachi and see for
yourself what Musashi is up to. Then go back and tell Otsū what you saw. She'll
be heartbroken for a while, but it just might open her eyes."
       Jōtarō put his fingers in his ears. "Shut up, you acorn-headed old fraud!"
       "You're the one who came chasing after me, or have you forgotten?"
       As Takuan walked off and left him, Jōtarō stood in the middle of the street,
repeating a very disrespectful chant with which street urchins were wont to taunt
beggar priests. But the moment Takuan was out of sight, he choked up, burst into
tears and wept hopelessly. When he finally pulled himself together, he wiped his
eyes and, like a lost puppy suddenly remembering the way home, began his
search for the Ōgiya.

     The first person he saw was a woman. Head covered by a veil, she
appeared to be an ordinary housewife. Jōtarō ran up to her and asked, "How do
you get to Yanagimachi?"
    "That's the licensed quarter, isn't it?"
    "What's a licensed quarter?"
    "Goodness!"
    "Well, tell me, what do they do there?"
    "Why, you—!" She glared at him indignantly for a moment before
    hastening on.
    Undaunted, Jōtarō went steadfastly on his way, asking one person after
    another where the Ōgiya was.
