The Gate


      Jōtarō thought their next move would be to get out of the quarter without
      being detected.
      "Going this way will take us to the main gate," he said. "That would be
      dangerous."
      "Mm."
      "There must be another way out."
      "Aren't all the entrances except the main one closed at night?" "We could
      climb the wall."
       "That would be cowardly. I do have a sense of honor, you know, as well as
a reputation to maintain. I'll walk straight out the main entrance, when the time is
right."
       "You will?" Though uneasy, the boy didn't argue, for he was well aware
that according to the rules of the military class, a man without pride was
worthless.
      "Of course," replied Musashi. "But not you. You're still a child. You can go
      out some safer way."
      "How?"
      "Over the wall."
      "By myself?"
      "By yourself."
      "I can't do that."
      "Why not?"
      "I'd be called a coward."
      "Don't be foolish. They're after me, not you."
      "But where will we meet?"
      "The Yanagi Riding Grounds."
      "You're sure you'll come?"
      "Absolutely."
      "Promise you won't run off again?"
       "I won't run away. One of the things I don't intend to teach you is lying. I
said I'll meet you, and I will. Now, while nobody's around, let's get you over the
wall."

       Jōtarō looked about cautiously before making a run for the wall, where he
stopped dead, looking wistfully upward. It was more than double his height.
Musashi joined him, carrying a sack of charcoal. He dropped the sack and
peered through a crack in the wall.
      "Can you see anyone out there?" Jōtarō asked.
      "No; nothing but rushes. There may be water underneath, so you'll have to
      be careful when you land."
      "I don't care about getting wet, but how am I going to get to the top of this
      wall?"
       Musashi ignored the question. "We have to assume guards have been
stationed at strategic points besides the main gate. Take a good look around
before you jump, or you may find a sword pointed at you."
      "I understand."
      "I'll throw this charcoal over the wall as a decoy. If nothing happens, you
      can go ahead."
      He stooped and Jōtarō jumped onto his back. "Stand on my shoulders." "My
      sandals are dirty."
      "Never mind."
      Jōtarō hoisted himself to a standing position.
      "Can you reach the top?"
      "No."
      "If you jumped, could you make it?"
      "I don't think so."
      "All right; stand on my hands." He stretched his arms straight above his
      head.
      "I've got it!" Jōtarō said in a loud whisper.
      Musashi took the sack of charcoal in one hand and lobbed it as high as he
      could. It thudded into the rushes. Nothing happened.
      "There's no water here," Jōtarō reported after he jumped down. "Take care
      of yourself."
       Musashi kept one eye to the crack until he could no longer hear Jōtarō's
footsteps, then walked quickly and lightheartedly to the busiest of the main
alleys. None of the many revelers milling about paid any attention to him.
       When he went out the main gate, the Yoshioka men uttered a collective
gasp, and all eyes focused on him. Besides the guards at the gate, there were
samurai squatting around the bonfires where the palanquin bearers passed the
time while they waited, and relief guards in the Amigasa teahouse and the

drinking shop across the street. Their vigilance had never relaxed. Basket hats
had been unceremoniously lifted and faces examined; palanquins had been
stopped and their occupants examined.
       Several times negotiations had been started with the Ōgiya to search the
premises, but these had come to naught. As far as the management was
concerned, Musashi was not there. The Yoshiokas could not act on the rumor
that Yoshino Dayū was protecting Musashi. She was too highly admired, both
within the district and in the city itself, to be assailed without serious
repercussions.
       Obliged to fight a waiting war, the Yoshiokas had encircled the quarter at a
distance. They didn't rule out the possibility that Musashi might try to escape
over the wall, but most expected him to leave by the gate, either in disguise or in
a closed palanquin. The one contingency they were unprepared for was the one
they were faced with now.
       No one made a move to block Musashi's path, nor did he pause to
acknowledge them. He covered a hundred paces with bold strides before a
samurai shouted, "Stop him!"
      "After him!"
      Eight or nine shouting men filled the street behind Musashi and began
      stalking him.
      "Musashi, wait!" called an angry voice.
      "What is it?" he replied immediately, startling all with the force of his
      voice.
       He moved to the side of the road and backed up against the wall of a
shanty. The shanty was part of a sawmill, and a couple of the mill hands slept
there. One of them opened the door a crack, but after a quick glance slammed
the door and bolted it.
       Yelping and howling like a pack of stray dogs, the Yoshioka men gradually
formed a black crescent around Musashi. He stared intently at them, gauging
their strength, assessing their position, anticipating where a move might come
from. The thirty men were quickly losing the use of their thirty minds. It was not
difficult for Musashi to read the workings of this communal brain.
       As he had anticipated, not one came forward alone to challenge him. They
babbled and hurled insults, most of which sounded like the barely articulate
name-calling of common tramps.
      "Bastard!"
      "Coward!"

     "Amateur!"
       They themselves were far from realizing that their bravado was merely
vocal and revealed their weakness. Until the horde achieved a degree of
cohesion, Musashi had the upper hand. He examined their faces, singled out the
ones who might be dangerous, picked out the weak spots in the formation, and
prepared himself for battle.
     He took his time, and after slowly scrutinizing their faces, declared, "I am
     Musashi. Who called to me to wait?"
     "We did. All of us!"
     "I take it that you're from the Yoshioka School."
     "That's right."
     "What business do you have with me?"
     "You know! Are you prepared?"
       "Prepared?" Musashi's lips twisted into a sardonic grin. The laugh that
issued from his white teeth chilled their excitement. "A real warrior is prepared
even in his sleep. Come forward when you wish! When you're picking a
meaningless fight, what sense is there in trying to talk like a human being or in
observing the etiquette of the sword? But tell me one thing. Is your objective
only to see me dead? Or do you want to fight like men?"
       No answer.
       "Are you here to settle a grudge or challenge me to a return bout?"
       Had Musashi, by the slightest false movement of eye or body, given them
an opening, their swords would have rushed at him like air into a vacuum, but he
maintained perfect poise. No one moved. The entire group stood as still and
silent as prayer beads.
       Out of the confused silence came a loud shout: "You should know the
answer without asking."
       Musashi, shooting a glance at the speaker, Miike Jūrōzaemon, judged from
the man's appearance that he was a samurai worthy to uphold Yoshioka Kempō's
reputation. He alone seemed willing to end the stalemate by striking the first
blow. His feet edged forward in a sliding motion.
       "You maimed our teacher Seijūrō and killed his brother Denshichirō. How
can we hold up our heads if we let you live? Hundreds of us who are loyal to our
master have vowed to remove the source of his humiliation and restore the name
of the Yoshioka School. It's not a matter of grudges or lawless violence. But we
will vindicate our master and console the spirit of his slain brother. I don't envy
you your position, but we're going to take your head. On guard!"

       "Your challenge is worthy of a samurai," replied Musashi. "If this is your
true purpose, I may lose my life to you. But you talk of discharging your duty,
you speak of revenge according to the Way of the Samurai. Why, then, do you
not challenge me properly, as Seijūrō and Denshichirō did? Why do you attack
en masse?"
       "You're the one who's been hiding!"
       "Nonsense! You're merely proving that a coward attributes cowardice to
others. Am I not standing here before you?"
       "Because you were afraid of being caught when you tried to escape!" "Not
so! I could have escaped any number of ways."
       "And did you think the Yoshioka School would have let you?"
       "I assumed that you would greet me one way or another. But wouldn't it
disgrace us, not only as individuals but as members of our class, to brawl here?
Should we disturb the people here, like a pack of wild beasts or worthless
tramps? You speak of your obligation to your master, but wouldn't a fight here
heap still greater shame on the Yoshioka name? If that's what you've decided on,
then that's what you shall have! If you've resolved to destroy your teacher's
work, disband your school and abandon the Way of the Samurai, I have nothing
more to say—save this: Musashi will fight so long as his limbs hold together."
       "Kill him!" cried the man next to Jūrōzaemon, whipping out his sword. A
distant voice cried, "Watch out! It's Itakura!"
       As magistrate of Kyoto, Itakura Katsushige was a powerful man, and
though he governed well, he did so with an iron fist. Even children sang songs
about him. "Whose chestnut roan is that, /clopping down the street?/ Itakura
Katsushige's?/Run, everyone, run." Or "Itakura, Lord of Iga, has/ more hands
than the Thousand-armed Kannon,/more eyes than the three-eyed Temmoku./His
constables are everywhere."
       Kyoto was not an easy city to rule. While Edo was well on the way to
replacing it as the country's greatest city, the ancient capital was still a center for
economic, political and military life. And as the place where culture and
education were most highly advanced, it was also the one where criticism of the
shogunate was most articulate. The townspeople had, from about the fourteenth
century, given up all military ambition and taken to trades and crafts. They were
now recognized as a class apart, and on the whole a conservative one.
       Also among the populace were many samurai who sat on the fence,
waiting to see whether the Tokugawas would be upset by the Toyotomis, as well
as a number of upstart military leaders who, while lacking both background and

lineage, managed to maintain personal armies of considerable size. There was
also a considerable number of rōnin like those in Nara.
       Libertines and hedonists were plentiful in all classes, so that the number of
drinking shops and brothels was disproportionate to the city's size.
       Considerations of expediency rather than political convictions tended to
govern the allegiance of a substantial portion of the people. They swam with the
current and grasped any opportunity seemingly favorable to themselves.
       A story circulated in the city at the time of Itakura's appointment, in 1601,
said that before accepting, he asked Ieyasu if he might first consult his wife.
When he returned home, he said to her: "Since ancient times, there have been
innumerable men in positions of honor who have performed outstanding deeds
but have ended up bringing disgrace upon themselves and their families. Most
often the source of their failure is to be found in their wives or family
connections. Thus I consider it most important to discuss this appointment with
you. If you will swear that you won't interfere with my activities as magistrate, I
will accept the post."
       His wife readily consented, avowing that "wives have no business
interfering in matters of this sort." Then the next morning, as Itakura was about
to leave for Edo Castle, she noticed that the collar of his underrobe was askew.
She had barely touched it when he admonished her: "You've forgotten your oath
already." She was made to swear again that she would not meddle. It was
generally agreed that Itakura was an effective deputy, strict but fair, and that
Ieyasu had been wise to choose him.
       At the mention of his name, the samurai shifted their eyes away from
Musashi. Itakura's men patrolled the quarter regularly, and everyone gave them a
wide berth.
       A young man pushed his way into the open space in front of Musashi.
"Wait!" he cried in the booming voice that had given the alarm.
       Smirking, Sasaki Kojirō said, "I was just getting out of my palanquin when
I heard a fight was about to break out. I've been afraid for some time this might
happen. I'm appalled to see it take place here and now. I'm not a partisan of the
Yoshioka School. Still less am I a supporter of Musashi. Nevertheless, as a
warrior and visiting swordsman, I believe I am qualified to make an appeal in
the name of the warrior's code and the warrior class as a whole." He spoke
forcefully and eloquently, but in a patronizing tone and with uncompromising
arrogance.
       "I want to ask you what you're going to do when the police get here.

Wouldn't you be ashamed to be picked up in a common street brawl? If you force
the authorities to take notice, it won't be treated like an ordinary fight among
townspeople. But that is another question.
       "Your timing is bad. So is the place. It's a disgrace to the entire military
class for samurai to disturb the public order. As one of your number, I enjoin you
to cease this unseemly behavior immediately. If you must cross swords to settle
your grievance, then in the name of heaven, abide by the rules of
swordsmanship. Choose a time and place!"
      "Fair enough!" said Jūrōzaemon. "But if we set a time and place, can you
      guarantee Musashi will appear?"
      "I'd be willing to, but—"
      "Can you guarantee it?"
      "What can I say? Musashi can speak for himself!"
      "Perhaps you have in mind helping him to escape!"
       "Don't be an ass! If I were to show partiality to him, the rest of you would
challenge me. He's no friend of mine. There's no reason for me to protect him.
And if he leaves Kyoto, you only have to put up notices all over town to expose
his cowardice."
       "That's not enough. We aren't leaving here tonight unless you guarantee to
take custody of him until the bout."
       Kojirō spun around. He thrust out his chest and walked closer to Musashi,
who had been staring fixedly at his back. Their eyes locked, like those of two
wild beasts watching each other. There was an inevitability in the way their
youthful egos were pitted one against the other, a recognition of the other man's
ability and, perhaps, a mote of fear.
      "Do you consent, Musashi, to meet as I have proposed?"
      "I accept."
      "Good."
      "However, I take exception to your involvement."
      "You're not willing to put yourself in my custody?"
       "I resent the implication. In my bouts with Seijūrō and Denshichirō, I have
done absolutely nothing cowardly. Why should their followers think I'd flee in
the face of a challenge from them?"
      "Well spoken, Musashi. I won't forget that. Now, my guarantee aside, would
      you name the time and place?
      "I agree to any time and place they choose."
      "That, too, is a gallant answer. Where will you be between now and the

     time of the fight?"
     "I don't have an address."
     "If your opponents don't know where you are, how can they send a written
     challenge?"
     "Decide the time and place now. I'll be there."
      Kojirō nodded. After consulting with Jūrōzaemon and a few of the others,
he came back to Musashi and said, "They want the time to be five o'clock in the
morning the day after tomorrow."
      "I accept."
      "The place is to be the spreading pine at the foot of Ichijōji Hill, on the
road to Mount Hiei. The nominal representative of the House of Yoshioka will
be Genjirō, the eldest son of Yoshioka Genzaemon, uncle of Seijurō and
Denshichirō. Genjirō being the new head of the House of Yoshioka, the bout will
be conducted in his name. But he is still a child, so it is stipulated that a number
of the Yoshioka disciples will accompany him as his seconds. I tell you this to
preclude any misunderstanding."
      After promises had been formally exchanged, Kojirō knocked on the door
of the shanty. The door was gingerly opened and the mill hands peeped out.
      "There must be some wood you don't need around here," Kojirō said
gruffly. "I want to put up a sign. Find me a suitable board and nail it to a post
about six feet long."
      While the board was being planed, Kojirō sent a man for brush and ink.
Materials assembled, he wrote the time, place and other details in an expert
hand. As before, the notice was being made public, for this was a better
guarantee than a private exchange of oaths. To dishonor the pledge would be to
bring on public ridicule.
      Musashi watched the Yoshioka men erect the signboard at the most
conspicuous corner in the neighborhood. He turned away nonchalantly and
walked rapidly to the Yanagi Riding Grounds.


      All alone in the dark, Jōtarō was fidgety. Eyes and ears were alert, but he
saw only the occasional light of a palanquin and heard only fleeting echoes of
men singing songs on their way home. Dreading the thought that Musashi might
have been injured or even killed, he eventually lost patience and started off at a
run toward Yanagimachi.
     Before he had gone a hundred yards, Musashi's voice came through the

      darkness. "Hey! What's this?"
      "Oh, there you are!" the boy exclaimed with relief. "It took you so long, I
      decided to go have a look."
      "That wasn't very smart. We might have missed each other."
      "Were there lots of Yoshioka men outside the gate?"
      "Um, quite a few."
      "Didn't they try to capture you?" Jōtarō looked quizzically up at Musashi's
      face. "Nothing at all happened?"
      "That's right."
      "Where are you going? Lord Karasumaru's house is this way. I bet you're
      eager to see Otsū, aren't you?"
      "I want to see her very badly."
      "At this time of night, she'll be terribly surprised."
      An awkward silence ensued.
      "Jōtarō, do you remember that little inn where we first met? What was the
      name of the village?"
      "Lord Karasumaru's house is much nicer than that old inn."
      "I'm sure there's no comparison."
       "Everything's closed up for the night, but if we go around to the servants'
gate, they'll let us in. And when they find out I've brought you, Lord Karasumaru
himself may come to greet you. Oh, I meant to ask you, what's wrong with that
crazy monk Takuan? He was so mean it made me sick. He told me the best thing
to do with you was leave you alone. And he didn't want to tell me where you
were, though he knew perfectly well all along."
       Musashi made no comment. Jōtarō prattled on as they walked.
       "There it is," said Jōtarō, pointing at the back gate. Musashi stopped but
said nothing. "See that light above the fence? That's the north wing, where Otsū's
staying. She must be waiting up for me."
       As he made a quick move toward the gate, Musashi gripped his wrist
tightly and said, "Not just yet. I'm not going into the house. I want you to give
Otsū a message for me."
      "Not going in? Isn't that why you're here?"
      "No. I only wanted to see that you arrived safely."
      "You must come in! You can't leave now!" He tugged frantically at
      Musashi's sleeve.
      "Keep your voice down," said Musashi, "and listen."
      "I won't listen! I won't! You promised to come with me."

      "And I did come, didn't I?"
       "I didn't invite you to look at the gate. I asked you to visit Otsū." "Calm
down.... For all I know, I may be dead in a very short time."
       "That's nothing new. You're always saying a samurai must be prepared to
       die at any time."
       "That's true, and I think it's a good lesson for me to hear you repeat my
words. But this time isn't like the others. I already know I don't have one chance
in ten of surviving. That's why I don't think I should see Otsū."
      "That doesn't make sense."
      "You wouldn't understand now if I explained. When you grow older,
      though, you will."
      "Are you telling the truth? Do you really think you're going to die?"
       "I do. But you can't tell Otsū that, not while she's sick. Tell her to be
strong, to choose a path that will lead to her future happiness. That's the message
I want you to give her. You mustn't mention anything about my being killed."
       "I will tell her! I'll tell her everything! How can I lie to Otsū? Oh, please,
please come with me."
       Musashi pushed him away. "You're not listening."
       Jōtarō couldn't hold back the tears. "But ... but I feel so sorry for her. If I
tell her you refused to see her, she'll get worse. I know she will."
       "That's why you have to give her my message. Tell her it won't do either of
us any good to see each other as long as I'm still training to be a warrior. The
way I've chosen is one of discipline. It requires me to overcome my sentiments,
lead a stoic life, immerse myself in hardship. If I don't, the light I seek will
escape me. Think, Jōtarō. You yourself are going to have to follow the same
path, or you'll never become a self-respecting warrior."
       The boy was quiet, except for his weeping. Musashi put his arm around
him and hugged him.
       "The Way of the Samurai—one never knows when it will end. When I'm
gone, you must find yourself a good teacher. I can't see Otsū now, because I
know that in the long run she'll be happier if we don't meet. And when she finds
happiness, she'll understand how I feel now. That light—are you sure it's coming
from her room? She must be lonely. You must go and get some sleep."
       Jōtarō was beginning to understand Musashi's dilemma, but there was a
trace of sullenness in his attitude as he stood with his back to his teacher. He
realized he could press Musashi no further.
       Lifting his tearful face, he grasped at the last faint ray of hope. "When

your studies are finished, will you see Otsū and make up with her? You will,
won't you? When you think you've studied long enough."
      "Yes, when that day comes."
      "When will that be?"
      "It's difficult to say."
      "Two years, maybe?"
      Musashi did not answer.
      "Three years?"
      "There's no end to the path of discipline."
      "Aren't you ever going to see Otsū again, for the rest of your life?"
       "If the talents I was born with are the right ones, I may someday achieve
my goal. If not, I may go through life being as stupid as I am now. But now I'm
faced with the possibility of dying soon. How can a man with that prospect make
vows for the future to a woman as young as Otsū?"
       He had said more than he'd intended to. Jōtarō looked bewildered, but then
said triumphantly, "You don't have to promise Otsū anything. All I'm asking is
that you see her."
       "It's not as simple as that. Otsū's a young woman. I'm a young man. I
dislike admitting this to you, but if I met her, I'm afraid her tears would defeat
me. I wouldn't be able to stick to my decision."
       Musashi was no longer the impetuous youth who had spurned Otsū at
Hanada Bridge. He was less self-centered and reckless, more patient and much
more gentle. Yoshino's charm might have reawakened the fires of passion, had
he not rejected love in much the same way that fire repels water. Still, when the
woman was Otsū, he lacked confidence in his ability to practice self-control. He
knew that he must not think of her without considering the effect he might have
on her life.
       Jōtarō heard Musashi's voice close to his ear. "Do you understand now?"
The boy wiped the tears from his eyes, but when he took his hand away
       from his face and looked around, he saw nothing but thick black mist.
"Sensei!" he cried.
       Even as he ran to the corner of the long earthen wall, he knew his cries
would never bring Musashi back. He pressed his face to the wall; the tears came
afresh. He felt utterly defeated, again by adult reasoning. He wept until his throat
tightened and no sound came out, but his shoulders went on shaking with
convulsive sobs.
       Noticing a woman outside the servants' gate, he thought it must be one of

the kitchen girls returning from a late errand and wondered if she had heard him
crying.
       The shadowy figure raised her veil and walked slowly toward him.
"Jōtarō? Jōtarō, is that you?"
       "Otsū! What are you doing out here? You're sick."
       "I was worried about you. Why did you leave without saying anything to
anyone? Where have you been all this time? The lamps were lit and the gate
closed and still you didn't return. I can't tell you how worried I was."
     "You're crazy. What if your fever goes up again? Go back to bed, right
     now!"
     "Why were you crying?"
     "I'll tell you later."
     "I want to know now. There must have been something to upset you so. You
     went chasing after Takuan, didn't you?"
     "Hmm. Yes."
     "Did you find out where Musashi is?"
     "Takuan's evil. I hate him!"
     "He didn't tell you?"
     "Uh, no."
     "You're hiding something from me."
       "Oh, you're both impossible!" wailed Jōtarō. "You and that stupid teacher
of mine. I can't tell you anything before you lie down and I put a cold towel on
your head. If you don't go back to the house now, I'm going to drag you there."
       Seizing her wrist with one hand and beating on the gate with the other, he
called furiously, "Open up! The sick girl's out here. If you don't hurry up, she'll
freeze!"
