The Dowager's Wrath 
Matahachi's family, the Hon'iden, were the proud members of a group of 
mral gentry who belonged to the samurai class but who also worked the land. 
The real head of the family was his mother, an incorrigibly stubborn woman 
named Osugi. Though nearly sixty, she led her family and tenants out to the 
fields daily and worked as hard as any of them. At planting time she hoed the 
fields and after the harvest threshed the barley by trampling it. When dusk forced 
her to stop working, she always found something to sling on her bent back and 
haul back to the house. Often it was a load of mulberry leaves so big that her 
body, almost doubled over, was barely visible beneath it. In the evening, she 
could usually be found tending her silkworms. 
On the afternoon of the flower festival, Osugi looked up from her work in 
the mulberry patch to see her runny-nosed grandson racing barefoot across the 
field. 
"Where've you been, Heita?" she asked sharply. "At the temple?" "Uh- 
huh." 
"Was Otsu there?" 
"Yes," he answered excitedly, still out of breath. "And she had on a very 
pretty obi. She was helping with the festival." 
"Did you bring back some sweet tea and a spell to keep the bugs away?" 
"Unh-unh." 
The old woman's eyes, usually hidden amid folds and wrinkles, opened 
wide in irritation. "And why not?" 
"Otsu told me not to worry about them. She said I should run right home 
and tell you." 
"Tell me what?" 
"Takezo, from across the river. She said she saw him. At the festival." 
Osugi's voice dropped an octave. "Really? Did she really say that, Heita?" "Yes, 
Granny." 
Her strong body seemed to go limp all at once, and her eyes blurred with 
tears. Slowly she turned, as though expecting to see her son standing behind her. 

Pagina 56 di 1295

Seeing no one, she spun back around. "Heita," she said abruptly, "you take 
over and pick these mulberry leaves." 
"Where're you going?" 
"Home. If Takezo's back, Matahachi must be too." 
"I'll come too." 
"No you won't. Don't be a nuisance, Heita." 
The old woman stalked off, leaving the little boy as forlorn as an orphan. 
The farmhouse, surrounded by old, gnarled oaks, was a large one. Osugi ran past 
it, heading straight for the barn, where her daughter and some tenant farmers 
were working. While still a fair distance away, she began calling to them 
somewhat hysterically. 
"Has Matahachi come home? Is he here yet?" 
Startled, they stared at her as though she'd lost her wits. Finally one of the 
men said "no," but the old woman seemed not to hear. It was as though in her 
overwrought state she refused to take no for an answer. When they continued 
their noncommittal gaze, she began calling them all dunces and explaining what 
she'd heard from Heita, how if Takezo was back, then Matahachi must be too. 
Then, reassuming her role as commander in chief, she sent them off in all 
directions to find him. She herself stayed behind in the house, and every time she 
sensed someone approaching, ran out to ask if they had found her son yet. 
At sunset, still undaunted, she placed a candle before the memorial tablets 
of her husband's ancestors. She sat down, seemingly lost in prayer, as immobile 
as a statue. Since everyone was still out searching, there was no evening meal at 
the house, and when night fell and there was still no news, Osugi finally moved. 
As if in a trance, she walked slowly out of the house to the front gate. There she 
stood and waited, hidden in the darkness. A watery moon shone through the oak 
tree branches, and the mountains looming before and behind the house were 
veiled in a white mist. The sweetish scent of pear blossoms floated in the air. 
Time, too, floated by unnoticed. Then a figure could be discerned 
approaching, making its way along the outer edge of the pear orchard. 
Recognizing the silhouette as Otsu's, Osugi called out and the girl ran forward, 
her wet sandals clomping heavily on the earth. 
"Otsu! They told me you saw Takezo. Is that true?" 
"Yes, I'm sure it was him. I spotted him in the crowd outside the temple." 

Pagina 57 di 1295

"You didn't see Matahachi?" 
"No. I rushed out to ask Takezo about him, but when I called out, Takezo 
jumped like a scared rabbit. I caught his eye for a second and then he was gone. 
He's always been strange, but I can't imagine why he ran away like that." 
"Ran away?" asked Osugi with a puzzled air. She began to muse, and the 
longer she did so, the more a terrible suspicion took shape in her mind. It was 
becoming clear to her that the Shimmen boy, that ruffian Takezo she so hated for 
luring her precious Matahachi off to war, was once more up to no good. 
At length she said ominously, "That wretch! He's probably left poor 
Matahachi to die somewhere, then sneaked back home safe and sound. Coward, 
that's what he is!" Osugi began to shake in fury and her voice rose to a shriek. 
"He can't hide from me!" 
Otsu remained composed. "Oh, I don't think he'd do anything like that. 
Even if he did have to leave Matahachi behind, surely he'd bring us word or at 
least some keepsake from him." Otsu sounded shocked by the old woman's hasty 
accusation. 
Osugi, however, was by now convinced of Takezo's perfidy. She shook her 
head decisively and went on. "Oh, no he wouldn't! Not that young demon! He 
hasn't got that much heart. Matahachi should never have taken up with him." 
"Granny ..." Otsu said soothingly. 
"What?" snapped Osugi, not soothed in the least. 
"I think that if we go over to Ogin's house, we just might find Takezo 
there." 
The old woman relaxed a bit. "You might be right. She is his sister, and 
there really isn't anyone else in this village who'd take him in." 
"Then let's go and see, just the two of us." 
Osugi balked. "I don't see why I should do that. She knew her brother had 
dragged my son off to war, but she never once came to apologize or to pay her 
respects. And now that he's back, she hasn't even come to tell me. I don't see 
why I should go to her. It's demeaning. I'll wait here for her." 
"But this isn't an ordinary situation," replied Otsu. "Besides, the main thing 
at this point is to see Takezo as soon as we can. We've got to find out what 
happened. Oh, please, Granny, come. You won't have to do anything. I'll take 
care of all the formalities if you like." 

Pagina 58 di 1295

Grudgingly, Osugi allowed herself to be persuaded. She was, of course, as 
eager as Otsu to find out what was going on, but she'd die before begging for 
anything from a Shimmen. 
The house was about a mile away. Like the Hon'iden family, the Shimmen 
were country gentry, and both houses were descended from the Akamatsu clan 
many generations back. Situated across the river from one another, they had 
always tacitly recognized each other's right to exist, but that was the extent of 
their intimacy. 
When they arrived at the front gate, they found it shut, and the trees were 
so thick that no light could be seen from the house. Otsu started to walk around 
to the back entrance, but Osugi stopped mulishly in her tracks. 
"I don't think it's right for the head of the Hon'iden family to enter the 
Shimmen residence by the back door. It's degrading." 
Seeing she wasn't going to budge, Otsu proceeded to the rear entrance 
alone. Presently a light appeared just inside the gate. Ogin herself had come out 
to greet the older woman, who, suddenly transformed from a crone plowing the 
fields into a great lady, addressed her hostess in lofty tones. 
"Forgive me for disturbing you at this late hour, but my business simply 
could not wait. How good of you to come and let me in!" Sweeping past Ogin 
and on into the house, she went immediately, as though she were an envoy from 
the gods, to the most honored spot in the room, in front of the alcove. Sitting 
proudly, her figure framed by both a hanging scroll and a flower arrangement, 
she deigned to accept Ogin's sincerest words of welcome. 
The amenities concluded, Osugi went straight to the point. Her false smile 
disappeared as she glared at the young woman before her. "I have been told that 
young demon of this house has crawled back home. Please fetch him." Although 
Osugi's tongue was notorious for its sharpness, this undisguised maliciousness 
came as something of a shock to the gentle Ogin. 
"Whom do you mean by 'that young demon'?" asked Ogin, with palpable 
restraint. 
Chameleon-like, Osugi changed her tactics. "A slip of the tongue, I assure 
you," she said with a laugh. "That's what the people in the village call him; I 
suppose I picked it up from them. The 'young demon' is Takezo. He is hiding 
here, isn't he?" 
"Why, no," replied Ogin with genuine astonishment. Embarrassed to hear 
her brother referred to in this way, she bit her lip. 

Pagina 59 di 1295

Otsu, taking pity on her, explained that she had spotted Takezo at the 
festival. Then, in an attempt to smooth over ruffled feelings, she added, 
"Strange, isn't it, that he didn't come straight here?" 
"Well, he didn't," said Ogin. "This is the first I've heard anything about it. 
But if he is back, as you say, I'm sure he'll be knocking at the door any minute." 
Osugi, sitting formally on the floor cushion, legs tucked neatly beneath 
her, folded her hands in her lap and with the expression of an outraged mother- 
in-law, launched into a tirade. 
"What is all this? Do you expect me to believe you haven't heard from him 
yet? Don't you understand that I'm the mother whose son your young ne'er-do- 
well dragged off to war? Don't you know that Matahachi is the heir and the most 
important member of the Hon'iden family? It was your brother who talked my 
boy into going off to get himself killed. If my son is dead, it's your brother who 
killed him, and if he thinks he can just sneak back alone and get away with it. . 
I! 
The old woman stopped just long enough to catch her breath, then her eyes 
glared in fury once more. "And what about you? Since he's obviously had the 
indecency to sneak back by himself, why haven't you, his older sister, sent him 
immediately to me? I'm disgusted with both of you, treating an old woman with 
such disrespect. Who do you think I am?" 
Gulping down another breath, she ranted on. "If your Takezo is back, then 
bring my Matahachi back to me. If you can't do that, the least you can do is set 
that young demon down right here and make him explain to my satisfaction what 
happened to my precious boy and where he is—right now!" 
"How can I do that? He isn't here." 
"That's a black lie!" she shrieked. "You must know where he is!" 
"But I tell you I don't!" Ogin protested. Her voice quivered and her eyes 
filled with tears. She bent over, wishing with all her might her father were 
still alive. 
Suddenly, from the door opening onto the veranda, came a cracking noise, 
followed by the sound of running feet. 
Osugi's eyes flashed, and Otsu started to stand up, but the next sound was 

Pagina 60 di 1295

a hair-raising scream—as close to an animal's howl as the human voice is 
capable of producing. 
A man shouted, "Catch him!" 
Then came the sound of more feet, several more, running around the 
house, accompanied by the snapping of twigs and the rustling of bamboo. 
"It's Takezo!" cried Osugi. Jumping to her feet, she glared at the kneeling 
Ogin and spat out her words. "I knew he was here," she said ferociously. "It was 
as clear to me as the nose on your face. I don't know why you've tried to hide 
him from me, but bear in mind, I'll never forget this." 
She rushed to the door and slid it open with a bang. What she saw outside 
turned her already pale face even whiter. A young man wearing shin plates was 
lying face up on the ground, obviously dead but with fresh blood still streaming 
from his eyes and nose. Judging from the appearance of his shattered skull, 
someone had killed him with a single blow of a wooden sword. 
"There's . . . there's a dead ... a dead man out there!" she stammered. 
Otsu brought the light to the veranda and stood beside Osugi, who was 
staring terror-stricken at the corpse. It was neither Takezo's nor Matahachi's, but 
that of a samurai neither of them recognized. 
Osugi murmured, "Who could've done this?" Turning swiftly to Otsu, she 
said, "Let's go home before we get mixed up in something." 
Otsu couldn't bring herself to leave. The old woman had said a lot of 
vicious things. It would be unfair to Ogin to leave before putting salve on the 
wounds. If Ogin had been lying, Otsu felt she must doubtless have had good 
reason. Feeling she should stay behind to comfort Ogin, she told Osugi she 
would be along later. 
"Do as you please," snapped Osugi, as she made her departure. 
Ogin graciously offered her a lantern, but Osugi was proudly defiant in her 
refusal. "I'll have you know that the head of the Hon'iden family is not so senile 
that she needs a light to walk by." She tucked up her kimono hems, left the house 
and walked resolutely into the thickening mist. 
Not far from the house, a man called her to a halt. He had his sword 
drawn, and his arms and legs were protected by armor. He was obviously a 
professional samurai of a type not ordinarily encountered in the village. 
"Didn't you just come from the Shimmen house?" he asked. 

Pagina 61 di 1295

"Yes, but—" 
"Are you a member of the Shimmen household?" 
"Certainly not!" Osugi snapped, waving her hand in protest. "I am the head 
of the samurai house across the river." 
"Does that mean you are the mother of Hon'iden Matahachi, who went with 
Shimmen Takezo to the Battle of Sekigahara?" 
"Well, yes, but my son didn't go because he wanted to. He was tricked into 
going by that young demon." 
"Demon?" 
"That. . . Takezo!" 
"I gather this Takezo is not too well thought of in the village." 
"Well thought of? That's a laugh. You never saw such a hoodlum! You can't 
imagine the trouble we've had at my house since my son took up with 
him." "Your son seems to have died at Sekigahara. I'm—" 
"Matahachi! Dead?" 
"Well, actually, I'm not sure, but perhaps it'll be some comfort to you in 
your grief to know that I'll do everything possible to help you take revenge." 
Osugi eyed him skeptically. "Just who are you?" 
"I'm with the Tokugawa garrison. We came to Himeji Castle after the 
battle. On orders from my lord, I've set up a barrier on the Harima Province 
border to screen everyone who crosses. 
"This Takezo, from that house back there," he continued, pointing, "broke 
through the barrier and fled toward Miyamoto. We chased him all the way here. 
He's a tough one, all right. We thought that after a few days of walking he'd 
collapse, but we still haven't caught up with him. He can't go on forever, though. 
We'll get him." 
Nodding as she listened, Osugi realized now why Takezo hadn't appeared 
at the Shippoji, and more importantly, that he probably hadn't gone home, since 

Pagina 62 di 1295

that was the first place the soldiers would search. At the same time, since it 
seemed he was traveling alone, her fury wasn't diminished in the least. But as for 
Matahachi being dead, she couldn't believe that either. 
"I know Takezo can be as strong and cunning as any wild beast, sir," she 
said coyly, "But I shouldn't think that samurai of your caliber would have any 
trouble capturing him." 
"Well, frankly, that's what I thought at first. But there aren't many of us and 
he's just killed one of my men." 
"Let an old woman give you a few words of advice." Leaning over, she 
whispered something in his ear. Her words seemed to please him immensely. 
He nodded his approval and enthusiastically exclaimed, "Good idea! 
Splendid!" 
"Be sure to do a thorough job of it," urged Osugi as she took her leave. 
Not long afterward, the samurai regrouped his band of fourteen or fifteen 
men behind Ogin's house. After he briefed them, they piled over the wall, 
surrounding the house and blocking all exits. Several soldiers then stormed into 
the house, leaving a trail of mud, and crowded into the inner room where the two 
young women sat commiserating and dabbing at their tear-stained faces. 
Confronted by the soldiers, Otsu gasped and turned white. Ogin, however, 
proud to be the daughter of Munisai, was unperturbed. With calm, steely eyes, 
she stared indignantly at the intruders. 
"Which one of you is Takezo's sister?" asked one of them. 
"I am," replied Ogin coldly, "and I demand to know why you've entered 
this house without permission. I will not stand for such brutish behavior in a 
house occupied only by women." She had turned to face them directly. 
The man who had been chatting with Osugi a few minutes earlier pointed 
to Ogin. "Arrest her!" he ordered. 
Barely were the words out of his mouth before violence erupted, the house 
began to shake and the lights went out. Uttering a cry of terror, Otsu stumbled 
out into the garden, while at least ten of the soldiers fell upon Ogin and began 
tying her up with a rope. Despite her heroic resistance, it was all over in a few 
seconds. They then pushed her down onto the floor and began kicking her as 
hard as they could. 

Pagina 63 di 1295

Otsu couldn't recall afterward which way she had come, but somehow she 
managed to escape. Barely conscious, she ran barefoot toward the Shippoji in the 
misty moonlight, relying completely on instinct. She had grown up in peaceful 
surroundings and now felt as though the world were caving in. 
When she reached the foot of the hill where the temple stood, someone 
called to her. She saw a shape sitting on a rock among the trees. It was Takuan. 
"Thank heaven it's you," he said. "I was really starting to worry. You never 
stay out this late. When I realized the time, I came out looking for you." He 
looked down toward the ground and asked, "Why are you barefoot?" 
He was still gazing at Otsu's bare white feet when she rushed headlong 
into his arms and began wailing. 
"Oh, Takuan! It was awful! What can we do?" 
In a calm voice, he tried to soothe her. "There, there. What was awful? 
There aren't many things in this world that are all that bad. Calm down and tell 
me what happened." 
"They tied Ogin up and took her away! Matahachi didn't come back, and 
now poor Ogin, who's so sweet and gentle—they were all kicking her. Oh, 
Takuan, we've got to do something!" 
Sobbing and trembling, she clung desperately to the young monk, her head 
resting on his chest. 
It was noon on a still, humid spring day, and a faint mist rose from the 
young man's sweating face. Takezo was walking alone in the mountains, whither 
he knew not. He was tired almost beyond endurance, but even at the sound of a 
bird alighting, his eyes would dart around. Despite the ordeal he'd been through, 
his mud-spattered body came alive with pent-up violence and the sheer instinct 
to survive. 
"Bastards! Beasts!" he growled. In the absence of the real target of his 
fury, he swung his black-oak sword screeching through the air, slicing a thick 
branch off a large tree. The white sap that poured from the wound reminded him 
of a nursing mother's milk. He stood and stared. With no mother to turn to, there 
was only loneliness. Instead of offering him comfort, even the running streams 
and rolling hills of his own home seemed to mock him. 
"Why are all the villagers against me?" he wondered. "The minute they see 
me, they report me to the guards on the mountain. The way they run when they 

Pagina 64 di 1295

catch sight of me, you'd think I was a madman." 
He'd been hiding in the Sanumo mountains for four days. Now, through 
the veil of the midday mist, he could make out the house of his father, the house 
where his sister lived alone. Nestled in the foothills just below him was the 
Shippoji, the temple's roof jutting out from the trees. He knew he could approach 
neither place. When he'd dared go near the temple on the Buddha's birthday, 
crowded though it was, he'd risked his life. When he heard his name called, he 
had no choice but to flee. Aside from wanting to save his own neck, he knew 
that being discovered there would mean trouble for Otsu. 
That night, when he'd gone stealthily to his sister's house, Matahachi's 
mother—as luck would have it—had been there. For a while he'd just stood 
outside, trying to come up with an explanation of Matahachi's whereabouts, but 
as he was watching his sister through a crack in the door, the soldiers had spotted 
him. Again he had to flee without having the chance to speak to anyone. Since 
then, it appeared from his refuge in the mountains that the Tokugawa samurai 
were keeping a very sharp eye out for him. They patrolled every road he might 
take, while at the same time the villagers had banded together to form search 
parties and were scouring the mountains. 
He wondered what Otsu must think of him and began to suspect that even 
she had turned against him. Since it appeared that everyone in his own village 
regarded him as an enemy, he was stymied. 
He thought: "It'd be too hard to tell Otsu the real reason her fiance didn't 
come back. Maybe I should tell the old woman instead. . . . That's it! If I explain 
everything to her, she can break it gently to Otsu. Then there won't be any reason 
for me to hang around here." 
His mind made up, Takezo resumed walking, but he knew that it would not 
do to go near the village before dark. With a large rock he broke another into 
small pieces and hurled one of them at a bird in flight. After it fell to earth, he 
barely paused to pluck its feathers before sinking his half-starved teeth into the 
warm, raw flesh. As he was devouring the bird, he started walking again but 
suddenly heard a stifled cry. Whoever had caught sight of him was scrambling 
away frantically through the woods. Angered at the idea of being hated and 
feared—persecuted—for no reason, he shouted, "Wait!" and began running like a 
panther after the fleeing form. 
The man was no match for Takezo and was easily overtaken. It turned out 
to be one of the villagers who came to the mountains to make charcoal, and 
Takezo knew him by sight. Grabbing his collar, he dragged him back to a small 
clearing. 

Pagina 65 di 1295

"Why are you running away? Don't you know me? I'm one of you, Shim- 
men Takezo of Miyamoto. I'm not going to eat you alive. You know, it's very 
rude to run away from people without even saying hello!" 
"Y-y-y-y-yes, sir!" 
"Sit down!" 
Takezo released his grip on the man's arm, but the pitiful creature started to 
flee, forcing Takezo to kick his behind and make as if to strike him with his 
wooden sword. The man cringed on the ground like a simpering dog, his hands 
over his head. 
"Don't kill me!" he screamed pathetically. 
"Just answer my questions, all right?" 
"I'll tell you anything—just don't kill me! I have a wife and family." 
"Nobody's going to kill you. I suppose the hills are crawling with soldiers, aren't 
they?" 
"Yes." 
"Are they keeping close watch on the Shippoji?" 
"Yes." 
"Are the men from the village hunting for me again today?" 
Silence. 
"Are you one of them?" 
The man jumped to his feet, shaking his head like a deaf-mute. "No, no, 
no!" 
"That's enough," shouted Takezo. Taking a firm grip on the man's neck, he 
asked, "What about my sister?" 
"What sister?" 
"My sister, Ogin, of the House of Shimmen. Don't play dumb. You 
promised to answer my questions. I don't really blame the villagers for trying to 
capture me, because the samurai are forcing them to do it, but I'm sure they'd 
never do anything to hurt her. Or would they?" 

Pagina 66 di 1295

The man replied, too innocently, "I don't know anything about that. 
Nothing at all." 
Takezo swiftly raised his sword above his head in position to strike. 
"Watch it! That sounded very suspicious to me. Something has happened, hasn't 
it? Out with it, or I'll smash your skull!" 
"Wait! Don't! I'll talk! I'll tell you everything!" 
Hands folded in supplication, the trembling charcoal-maker told how Ogin 
had been taken away a prisoner, and how an order had been circulated in the 
village to the effect that anyone providing Takezo with food or shelter would 
automatically be regarded as an accomplice. Each day, he reported, the soldiers 
were leading villagers into the mountains, and each family was required to 
furnish one young man every other day for this purpose. 
The information caused Takezo to break out in goose pimples. Not fear. 
Rage. To make sure he'd heard right, he asked, "What crime has my sister been 
charged with?" His eyes were glistening with moisture. 
"None of us knows anything about it. We're afraid of the district lord. We're 
just doing what we're told, that's all." 
"Where have they taken my sister?" 
"Rumor has it that they've got her in Hinagura stockade, but I don't know if 
that's true." 
"Hinagura ..." repeated Takezo. His eyes turned toward the ridge that 
marked the provincial border. The backbone of the mountains was already 
spotted with the shadows of gray evening clouds. 
Takezo let the man go. Watching him scramble away, grateful to have his 
meager life spared, made Takezo's stomach turn at the thought of the cowardice 
of humanity, the cowardice that forced samurai to pick on a poor helpless 
woman. He was glad to be alone again. He had to think. 
He soon reached a decision. "I have to rescue Ogin, and that's that. My 
poor sister. I'll kill them all if they've harmed her." Having chosen his course of 
action, he marched down toward the village with long manly strides. 
A couple of hours later, Takezo again furtively approached the Shippoji. 
The evening bell had just stopped tolling. It was already dark and lights could be 
seen coming from the temple itself, the kitchen and the priests' quarters, where 

Pagina 67 di 1295

people seemed to be moving about. 
"If only Otsu would come out," he thought. 
He crouched motionless under the raised passageway—it was of the sort 
that had a roof but no walls—which connected the priests' rooms with the main 
temple. The smell of food being cooked floated in the air, conjuring up visions of 
rice and steaming soup. For the past few days, Takezo had had nothing in his 
stomach but raw bird meat and grass shoots, and his stomach now rebelled. His 
throat burned as he vomited up bitter gastric juices, and in his misery he gasped 
loudly for breath. 
"What was that?" said a voice. 
"Probably just a cat," answered Otsu, who came out carrying a dinner tray 
and started crossing the passageway directly over Takezo's head. He tried to call 
to her, but was still too nauseated to make an intelligible sound. 
This, as it happened, was a stroke of luck, because just then a male voice 
just behind Otsu inquired, "Which way is the bath?" 
The man was wearing a kimono borrowed from the temple, tied with a 
narrow sash from which dangled a small washcloth. Takezo recognized him as 
one of the samurai from Himeji. Evidently he was of high rank, high enough to 
lodge at the temple and pass his evenings eating and drinking his fill while his 
subordinates and the villagers had to scour mountainsides day and night 
searching for the fugitive. 
"The bath?" said Otsu. "Come, I'll show you." 
She set her tray down and began leading him along the passageway. 
Suddenly the samurai rushed forward and hugged her from behind. 
"How about joining me in the bath?" he suggested lecherously. 
"Stop that! Let go of me!" cried Otsu, but the man, turning her around, held 
her face in both big hands and brushed his lips against her cheek. "What's 
wrong!" he cajoled. "Don't you like men!" 
"Stop it! You shouldn't do that!" protested the helpless Otsu. The soldier 
then clapped his hand over her mouth. 
Takezo, oblivious of the danger, leapt up onto the passageway like a cat 

Pagina 68 di 1295

and thrust his fist at the man's head from behind. The blow was a hard one. 
Momentarily defenseless, the samurai fell backward, still clinging to Otsu. As 
she tried to break away from his hold, she let out a shrill scream. The fallen man 
began shouting, "It's him! It's Takezo! He's here! Come and take him!" 
The rumble of feet and the roar of voices thundered from inside the 
temple. The temple bell began signaling the alarm that Takezo had been 
discovered, and from the woods throngs of men began converging on the temple 
grounds. But Takezo was already gone, and before long search parties were once 
again sent out to scour the hills of Sanumo. Takezo himself hardly knew how 
he'd slipped through the swiftly tightening net, but by the time the chase was in 
full swing he found himself standing far away, at the entrance to the large dirt- 
floored kitchen of the Hon'iden house. 
Looking into the dimly lit interior, he called out, "Granny!" 
"Who's there!" came the shrill reply. Osugi ambled out from a back room. 
Lit from below by the paper lantern in her hand, her gnarled face paled at the 
sight of her visitor. 
"You!" she cried. 
"I have something important to tell you," Takezo said hurriedly. 
"Matahachi isn't dead, he's still very much alive and healthy. He's staying with a 
woman. In another province. That's all I can tell you, because that's all I know. 
Will you please somehow break the news to Otsu for me? I couldn't do it 
myself." 
Immensely relieved to have unburdened himself of the message, he started 
to leave, but the old woman called him back. 
"Where do you plan to go from here?" 
"I have to break into the stockade at Hinagura and rescue Ogin," he replied 
sadly. "After that, I'll go away somewhere. I just wanted to tell you and your 
family, as well as Otsu, that I didn't let Matahachi die. Other than that, I have no 
reason to be here." 
"I see." Osugi shifted the lantern from one hand to the other, playing for 
time. Then she beckoned to him. "I'll bet you're hungry, aren't you?" 
"I haven't had a decent meal for days." 
"You poor boy! Wait! I'm in the midst of cooking right now, and I can give 

Pagina 69 di 1295

you a nice warm dinner in no time. As a going-away present. And wouldn't you 
like to take a bath while I'm getting it ready?" 
Takezo was speechless. 
"Don't look so shocked. Takez 0 , your family and ours have been together 
since the days of the Akamatsu clan. I don't think you should leave here at all, 
but I certainly won't let you go without giving you a good hearty meal!" 
Again Takezo was unable to reply. He raised his arm and wiped his eyes. 
No one had been this kind to him for a long, long time. Having come to regard 
everybody with suspicion and distrust, he was suddenly remembering what it 
was like to be treated as a human being. 
"Hurry on round to the bathhouse, now," urged Osugi in grandmotherly 
tones. "It's too dangerous to stand here—someone might see you. I'll bring you a 
washcloth, and while you're washing, I'll get out Matahachi's kimono and some 
underwear for you. Now take your time and have a good soak." 
She handed him the lantern and disappeared into the back of the house. 
Almost immediately, her daughter-in-law left the house, ran through the garden 
and off into the night. 
From the bathhouse, where the lantern swung back and forth, came the 
sound of splashing water. 
"How is it?" Osugi called jovially. "Hot enough?" 
"It's just right! I feel like a new man," Takezo called back. 
"Take your time and get good and warm. The rice isn't ready yet." 
"Thanks. If I'd known it'd be like this, I'd have come sooner. I was sure 
you'd have it in for me!" He spoke two or three more times, but his voice was 
drowned out by the sound of the water and Osugi didn't answer. 
Before long, the daughter-in-law reappeared at the gate, all out of breath. 
She was followed by a band of samurai and vigilantes. Osugi came out of the 
house and addressed them in a whisper. 
"Ah, you got him to take a bath. Very clever," said one of the men 
admiringly. "Yes, that's fine! We've got him for sure this time!" 
Splitting into two groups, the men crouched and moved cautiously, like so 

Pagina 70 di 1295

many toads, toward the fire blazing brightly under the bath. Something— 
something indefinable—pricked Takezo's instincts, and he peeped out through a 
crack in the door. His hair stood on end. 
"I've been trapped!" he screamed. 
He was stark naked, the bathhouse was tiny, and there was no time to 
think. Beyond the door he'd spotted what seemed like hordes of men armed with 
staffs, lances and truncheons. 
Still, he wasn't really afraid. Any fear he might have had was blotted out 
by his anger toward Osugi. 
"All right, you bastards, watch this," he growled. 
He was well beyond caring how many of them there were. In this situation, 
as in others, the only thing he knew how to do was to attack rather than be 
attacked. As his would-be captors made way for each other outside, he abruptly 
kicked open the door and jumped out and into the air, bellowing a fearsome war 
whoop. Still naked, his wet hair flying in every direction, he seized and 
wrenched loose the shaft of the first lance thrust at him, sending its owner flying 
into the bushes. Taking a firm grip on the weapon, he thrashed about like a 
whirling dervish, swinging with complete abandon and hitting anyone who came 
near. He'd learned at Sekigahara that this method was startlingly effective when a 
man was outnumbered, and that the shaft of a lance could often be used more 
tellingly than the blade. 
The attackers, realizing too late what a blunder they'd made by not sending 
three or four men charging into the bathhouse in the first place, shouted 
encouragement to one another. It was clear, however, they'd been 
outmaneuvered. 
About the tenth time Takezo's weapon came in contact with the ground, it 
broke. He then seized a large rock and threw it at the men, who were already 
showing signs of backing down. 
"Look, he's run inside the house!" shouted one of them, as simultaneously 
Osugi and her daughter-in-law scrambled out into the back garden. 
Making a tremendous clatter as he stormed through the house, Takezo was 
yelling, "Where are my clothes? Give me back my clothes!" 
There were work clothes lying about, not to speak of an elaborate kimono 
chest, but Takezo paid them no attention. He was straining his eyes in the dim 
light to find his own ragged garment. Finally spotting it in the corner of the 
kitchen, he seized it in one hand and finding a foothold atop a large earthenware 

Pagina 71 di 1295

oven, crawled out of a small high window. While he made his way onto the roof, 
his pursuers, now totally confused, cursed and made excuses to each other for 
their failure to ensnare him. 
Standing in the middle of the roof, Takezo unhurriedly donned his kimono. 
With his teeth, he tore off a strip of cloth from his sash, and gathering his damp 
hair behind, tied it near the roots so tightly that his eyebrows and the corners of 
his eyes were stretched. 
The spring sky was full of stars.
