The Art of War 
The daily search in the mountains continued, and farm work languished; 
the villagers could neither cultivate their fields nor tend to their silkworms. 
Large signs posted in front of the village headman's house and at every 
crossroads announced a substantial reward for anyone who captured or killed 
Takezo, as well as suitable recompense for any information leading to his arrest. 
The notices bore the authoritative signature of Ikeda Terumasa, lord of Himeji 
Castle. 
At the Hon'iden residence, panic prevailed. Osugi and her family, 
trembling in mortal dread lest Takezo come to take his revenge, bolted the main 
gate and barricaded all entrances. The searchers, under the direction of troops 
from Himeji, laid fresh plans to trap the fugitive. Thus far all their efforts had 
proved fruitless. 
"He's killed another one!" a villager shouted. 
"Where? Who was it this time?" 
"Some samurai. No one's identified him yet." 
The corpse had been discovered near a path on the village outskirts, its 
head in a clump of tall weeds and its legs raised skyward in a bafflingly 
contorted position. Frightened but incurably nosy, villagers milled about, 
babbling among themselves. The skull had been smashed, evidently with one of 
the wooden reward signs, which now lay across the body soaked in blood. Those 
gawking at the spectacle could not avoid reading the list of promised rewards. 
Some laughed grimly at the blatant irony. 
Otsu's face was drawn and pale as she emerged from the crowd. Wishing 
she hadn't looked, she hurried toward the temple, trying to somehow blot out the 
image of the dead man's face lingering before her eyes. At the foot of the hill, 

Pagina 72 di 1295

she ran into the captain who was lodging at the temple and five or six of his men. 
They had heard of the gruesome killing and were on their way to investigate. 
Upon seeing the girl, the captain grinned. "Where've you been, Otsu?" he said 
with ingratiating familiarity. 
"Shopping," she replied curtly. Without bestowing so much as a glance 
upon him, she hurried up the temple's stone steps. She hadn't liked the man to 
begin with—he had a stringy mustache which she took particular exception to— 
but since the night he'd tried to force himself on her, the sight of him filled her 
with loathing. 
Takuan was sitting in front of the main hall, playing with a stray dog. She 
was hurrying by at some distance to avoid the mangy animal when the monk 
looked up and called, "Otsu, there's a letter for you." 
"For me?" she asked incredulously. 
"Yes, you were out when the runner came, so he left it with me." Taking 
the small scroll out of his kimono sleeve and handing it to her, he said, "You 
don't look too good. Is something wrong?" 
"I feel sick. I saw a dead man lying in the grass. His eyes were still open, 
and there was blood—" 
"You shouldn't look at things like that. But I guess the way things are now, 
you'd have to walk around with your eyes closed. I'm always tripping over 
corpses these days. Ha! And I'd heard this village was a little paradise!" 
"But why is Takezo killing all these people?" 
"To keep them from killing him, of course. They don't have any real reason 
to kill him, so why should he let them?" 
"Takuan, I'm scared!" she said pleadingly. "What would we do if he came 
here?" 
Dark cumulus clouds were drawing their cloak over the mountains. She 
took her mysterious letter and went to hide in the loom shed. On the loom was 
an unfinished strip of cloth for a man's kimono, part of the garment which, since 
the year before, she'd been spending every spare moment spinning silk yarn for. 
It was for Matahachi, and she was excited by the prospect of sewing all the 
pieces together into a full kimono. She had woven every strand meticulously, as 
if the weaving itself were drawing him closer to her. She wanted the garment to 
last forever. 

Pagina 73 di 1295

Seating herself before the loom, she gazed intently at the letter. "Whoever 
could have sent it?" she whispered to herself, sure that the letter must have really 
been meant for someone else. She read the address over and over, searching for a 
flaw. 
The letter had obviously made a long journey to reach her. The torn and 
crumpled wrapper was smudged all over with fingerprints and raindrops. She 
broke the seal, whereupon not one but two letters fell into her lap. The first was 
in an unfamiliar woman's hand, a somewhat older woman, she quickly guessed. 
I am writing merely to confirm what is written in the other letter, and 
will therefore not go into details. 
I am marrying Matahachi and adopting him into my family. However, 
he still seems concerned about you. I think it would be a mistake to let 
matters stand as they are. Matahachi is therefore sending you an 
explanation, the truth of which I hereby witness. 
Please forget Matahachi. 
Respectfully, Oko 
The other letter was in Matahachi's scrawl and explained at tiresome 
length all the reasons why it was impossible for him to return home. The gist of 
it, of course, was that Otsu should forget about her betrothal to him and find 
another husband. Matahachi added that since it was "difficult" for him to write 
directly to his mother of these matters, he would appreciate her help. If Otsu 
happened to see the old woman, she was to tell her Matahachi was alive and well 
and living in another province. 
Otsu felt the marrow of her spine turn to ice. She sat stricken, too shocked 
to cry or even to blink. The nails of the fingers holding the letter turned the same 
color as the skin of the dead man she had seen less than an hour before. 
The hours passed. Everyone in the kitchen began wondering where she'd 
gone. The captain in charge of the search was content to let his exhausted men 
sleep in the woods, but when he himself returned to the temple at dusk, he 
demanded comforts befitting his status. The bath had to be heated just so; fresh 
fish from the river had to be prepared to his specifications and someone had to 
fetch sake of the highest quality from one of the village homes. A great deal of 
work was entailed in keeping the man happy, and much of it naturally fell to 
Otsu. Since she was nowhere to be found, the captain's dinner was late. 
Takuan went out to search for her. He had no concern whatsoever for the 

Pagina 74 di 1295

captain, but he was beginning to worry about Otsu herself. It just wasn't like her 
to go off without a word. Calling her name, the monk crossed the temple 
grounds, passing by the loom shed several times. Since the door was shut, he 
didn't bother to look inside. 
Several times the temple priest stepped out onto the raised passageway and 
shouted to Takuan, "Have you found her yet? She's got to be around here 
somewhere." As time went on, he grew frantic, calling out, "Hurry up and find 
her! Our guest says he can't drink his sake without her here to pour it for him." 
The temple's manservant was dispatched down the hill to search for her, 
lantern in hand. At almost the same moment he took off, Takuan finally opened 
the loom shed door. 
What he saw inside gave him a start. Otsu was drooped over the loom in a 
state of obvious desolation. Not wanting to pry, he remained silent, staring at the 
two twisted and torn letters on the ground. They had been trampled on like a 
couple of straw effigies. 
Takuan picked them up. "Aren't these what the runner brought today?" he 
asked gently. "Why don't you put them away somewhere?" 
Otsu shook her head feebly. 
"Everyone's half-crazy with worry about you. I've been looking all over. 
Come, Otsu, let's go back. I know you don't want to, but you really do have work 
to do. You've got to serve the captain, for one thing. That old priest is nearly 
beside himself." 
"My . . . my head hurts," she whispered. "Takuan, couldn't they let me off 
tonight—just this once?" 
Takuan sighed. "Otsu, I personally think you shouldn't have to serve the 
captain's sake tonight or any night. The priest, however, is of a different mind. 
He is a man of this world. He's not the type who can gain the daimyo's respect or 
support for the temple through high-mindedness alone. He believes he has to 
wine and dine the captain—keep him happy every minute." He patted Otsu on 
the back. "And after all, he did take you in and raise you, so you do owe him 
something. You won't have to stay long." 
She consented reluctantly. While Takuan was helping her up, she raised 
her tear-stained face to him and said, "I'll go, but only if you promise to stay with 
me." 
"I have no objection to that, but old Scraggly Beard doesn't like me, and 

Pagina 75 di 1295

every time I see that silly mustache I have an irresistible urge to tell him how 
ridiculous it looks. It's childish, I know, but some people just affect me that 
way." 
"But I don't want to go alone!" 
"The priest is there, isn't he?" 
"Yes, but he always leaves when I arrive." 
"Hmm. That's not so good. All right, I'll go with you. Now stop thinking 
about it, and go wash your face." 
When Otsu finally appeared at the priest's quarters, the captain, already 
slouching drunkenly, immediately perked up. Straightening his cap, which had 
been listing noticeably, he became quite jovial and called for refill after refill. 
Soon his face glowed scarlet and the corners of his bulging eyes began to sag. 
He was not enjoying himself to the full, however, and the reason was a 
singularly unwanted presence in the room. On the other side of the lamp sat 
Takuan, bent over like a blind beggar, absorbed in reading the book open on his 
knees. 
Mistaking the monk for an acolyte, the captain pointed at him, bellowing, 
"Hey, you there!" 
Takuan continued reading until Otsu gave him a nudge. He raised his eyes 
absently, and looking all around, said, "You mean me?" 
The captain spoke gruffly. "Yes, you! I have no business with you. Leave!" 
"Oh, I don't mind staying," Takuan replied innocently. 
"Oh, you don't, do you?" 
"No, not at all," Takuan said, returning to his book. 
"Well, I mind," the captain blustered. "It spoils the taste of good sake to 
have someone around reading." 
"Oh, I'm sorry," responded Takuan with mock solicitude. "How rude of me. 
I'll just close the book." 

Pagina 76 di 1295

"The very sight annoys me." 
"All right, then. I'll have Otsu- put it away." 
"Not the book, you idiot! I'm talking about you! You spoil the setting." 
Takuan's expression became grave. "Now, that is a problem, isn't it? It's not 
as though I were the sacred Wu-k'ung and could change myself into a puff of 
smoke, or become an insect and perch on your tray." 
The captain's red neck swelled and his eyes bulged. He looked like a 
blowfish. "Get out, you fool! Out of my sight!" 
"Very well," said Takuan quietly, bowing. Taking Otsu's hand, he 
addressed her. "The guest says he prefers to be alone. To love solitude is the 
mark of the sage. We mustn't bother him further. Come." 
"Why . . . why, you . . . you . . ." 
"Is something wrong?" 
"Who said anything about taking Otsu with you, you ugly moron!" 
Takuan folded his arms. "I've observed over the years that not many priests 
or monks are particularly handsome. Not many samurai either, for that matter. 
Take you, for example." 
The captain's eyes nearly leapt from their sockets. "What!" 
"Have you considered your mustache? I mean, have you ever really taken 
the time to look at it, to evaluate it objectively?" 
"You crazy bastard," shouted the captain as he reached for his sword, 
which was leaning against the wall. "Watch yourself!" 
As he got to his feet, Takuan, keeping one eye on him, asked placidly, 
"Hmm. How do I go about watching myself?" 
The captain, who was by now screaming, had his sheathed sword in hand. 
"I've taken all I can take. Now you're going to get what's coming to you!" 
Takuan burst out laughing. "Does that mean you plan to cut off my head? 
If so, forget it. It would be a terrible bore." 

Pagina 77 di 1295

"Huh?" 
"A bore. I can't think of anything more boring than cutting off a monk's 
head. It would just fall to the floor and lie there laughing up at you. Not a very 
grand accomplishment, and what good could it possibly do you?" 
"Well," growled the captain, let's just say I'd have the satisfaction of 
shutting you up. It'd be pretty hard for you to keep up your insolent chatter!" 
Filled with the courage such people derive from having a weapon in hand, he 
laughed a mean belly laugh and moved forward threateningly. 
"But, captain!" 
Takuan's offhand manner had so enraged him that the hand in which he 
held his scabbard was shaking violently. Otsu slipped between the two men in an 
effort to protect Takuan. 
"What are you saying, Takuan?" she said, hoping to lighten the mood and 
slow the action. "People don't talk like that to warriors. Now, just say you're 
sorry," she entreated. "Come on, apologize to the captain." 
Takuan, however, was anything but finished. 
"Get out of the way, Otsu. I'm all right. Do you really think I'd let myself 
be beheaded by a dolt like this, who though commanding scores of able, armed 
men has wasted twenty days trying to locate one exhausted, half-starved 
fugitive? If he hasn't enough sense to find Takezo, it would indeed be amazing if 
he could outwit me!" 
"Don't move!" commanded the captain. His bloated face turned purple as 
he moved to draw his sword. "Stand aside, Otsu! I'm going to cut this big¬ 
mouthed acolyte in two!" 
Otsu fell at the captain's feet and pleaded, "You have every reason to be 
angry, but please be patient. He's not quite right in the head. He talks to 
everybody this way. He doesn't mean anything by it, really!" Tears began 
gushing from her eyes. 
"What are you saying, Otsu?" objected Takuan. "There's nothing wrong 
with my mind, and I'm not joking. I'm only telling the truth, which no one seems 
to like to hear. He's a dolt, so I called him a dolt. You want me to lie?" 
"You'd better not say that again," thundered the samurai. 
"I'll say it as often as I wish. By the way, I don't suppose it makes any 
difference to you soldiers how much time you squander looking for Takezo, but 

Pagina 78 di 1295

it's a terrible burden on the farmers. Do you realize what you're doing to them? 
They won't be able to eat soon if you keep this up. It probably hasn't even 
occurred to you that they have to neglect their field work completely to go out 
on your disorganized wild-goose chases. And with no wages, I might add. It's a 
disgrace!" 
"Hold your tongue, traitor. That's outright slander against the Tokugawa 
government!" 
"It isn't the Tokugawa government I'm criticizing; it's bureaucratic officials 
like you who stand between the daimyo and the common people, and who might 
as well be stealing their pay for all they do to earn it. For one thing, exactly why 
are you lounging around here tonight? What gives you the right to relax in your 
nice, comfortable kimono all snug and warm, take leisurely baths and have your 
bedtime sake poured for you by a pretty young girl? You call that serving your 
lord?" 
The captain was speechless. 
"Is it not the duty of a samurai to serve his lord faithfully and tirelessly? 
Isn't it your job to exercise benevolence toward the people who slave on the 
daimyo's behalf? Look at yourself! You just close your eyes to the fact that 
you're keeping the farmers from the work which gives them daily sustenance. 
You don't even have any consideration for your own men. You're supposed to be 
on an official mission, so what do you do? Every chance you get, you literally 
stuff yourself with other people's hard-earned food and drink and use your 
position to get the most comfortable quarters available. I should say you are a 
classic example of corruption, cloaking yourself with the authority of your 
superior to do nothing more than dissipate the energies of the common people 
for your own selfish ends." 
The captain was by now too stunned to close his gaping mouth. Takuan 
pressed on. 
"Now just try cutting off my head and sending it to Lord Ikeda Terumasa! 
That, I can tell you, would surprise him. He'd probably say, 'Why, Takuan! Has 
only your head come to visit me today? Where in the world is the rest of you?' 
"No doubt you'd be interested to learn that Lord Terumasa and I used to 
partake of the tea ceremony together at the Myoshinji. We've also had several 
long and pleasant chats at the Daitokuji in Kyoto." 
Scraggly Beard's virulence drained from him in an instant. His 
dmnkenness had worn off a bit too, though he still appeared incapable of judging 
for himself whether Takuan was telling the truth or not. He seemed paralyzed, 
not knowing how to react. 

Pagina 79 di 1295

"First, you'd better sit down," said the monk. "If you think I'm lying, I'll be 
happy to go with you to the castle and appear before the lord himself. As a gift, I 
could take him some of the delicious buckwheat flour they make here. He's 
particularly fond of it. 
"However, there's nothing more tedious, nothing I like less, than calling on 
a daimyo. Moreover, if the subject of your activities in Miyamoto should happen 
to come up while we were chatting over tea, I couldn't very well lie. It would 
probably end up with your having to commit suicide for your incompetence. I 
told you from the beginning to stop threatening me, but you warriors are all the 
same. You never think about consequences. And that's your greatest failing. 
"Now put your sword down and I'll tell you something else." 
Deflated, the captain complied. 
"Of course, you are familiar with General Sun-tzu's Art of War —you know, 
the classic Chinese work on military strategy? I assume any warrior in your 
position would be intimately acquainted with such an important book. Anyway, 
the reason I mention it is that I'd like to give you a lesson illustrating one of the 
book's main principles. I'd like to show you how to capture Takezo without 
losing any more of your own men or causing the villagers any more trouble than 
you have already. Now, this has to do with your official work, so you really 
should listen carefully." He turned to the girl. "Otsu, pour the captain another 
cup of sake, will you?" 
The captain was a man in his forties, ten years or so older than Takuan, but 
it was clear from their faces at this moment that strength of character is not a 
matter of age. Takuan's tongue-lashing had humbled the older man and his 
bluster had evaporated. 
Meekly he said, "No, I don't want any more sake. I hope you'll forgive me. 
I had no idea you were a friend of Lord Terumasa. I'm afraid I've been very 
rude." He was abject to the point of being comical, but Takuan refrained from 
mbbing it in. 
"Let's just forget about that. What I want to discuss is how to capture 
Takezo. That is what you have to do to carry out your orders and maintain your 
honor as a samurai, isn't it?" 
"Yes." 
"Of course, I also know you don't care how long it takes to catch the man. 
After all, the longer it takes, the longer you can stay on at the temple, eating, 

Pagina 80 di 1295

drinking and ogling Otsu." 
"Please, don't bring that up anymore. Particularly before his lordship." The 
soldier looked like a child ready to burst into tears. 
"I'm prepared to consider the whole incident a secret. But if this running 
around in the mountains all day long keeps up, the farmers will be in serious 
trouble. Not only the farmers but all the rest of the people as well. Everyone in 
this village is too upset and frightened to settle down and get on with their 
normal work. Now, as I see it, your trouble is that you have not employed the 
proper strategy. Actually, I don't think you've employed any strategy at all. I take 
it that you do not know The Art of War?” 
"I'm ashamed to admit it, but I don't." 
"Well, you should be ashamed! And you shouldn't be surprised when I call 
you a dolt. You may be an official, but you are sadly uneducated and totally 
ineffectual. There's no use in my beating you over the head with the obvious, 
however. I'll simply make you a proposition. I personally offer to capture Takezo 
for you in three days." 
"You capture him?" 
"Do you think I'm joking?" 
"No, but. . ." 
"But what?" 
"But counting the reinforcements from Himeji and all the farmers and foot 
soldiers, we've had more than two hundred men combing the mountains for 
nearly three weeks." 
"I'm well aware of that fact." 
"And since it's spring, Takezo has the advantage. There's plenty to eat up 
there this time of year." 
"Are you planning on waiting till it snows, then? Another eight months or 
so?" 
"No, uh, I don't think we can afford to do that." 
"You certainly can't. That's precisely why I'm offering to catch him for 
you. I don't need any help; I can do it alone. On second thoughts, though, maybe 
I should take Otsu along with me. Yes, the two of us would be enough." 

Pagina 81 di 1295

"You aren't serious, are you?" 
"Would you please be quiet! Are you implying that Takuan Soho spends all 
his time making up jokes?" 
"Sorry." 
"As I said, you don't know The Art of War, and as I see it, that is the most 
important reason for your abominable failure. I, on the other hand, may be a 
simple priest, but I believe I understand Sun-tzu. There's only one stipulation, 
and if you won't agree to it, I'll just have to sit back and watch you bumble about 
until the snow falls, and maybe your head as well." 
"What's the condition?" said the captain warily. 
"If I bring back the fugitive, you'll let me decide his fate." 
"What do you mean by that?" The captain pulled at his mustache, a string 
of thoughts racing through his mind. How could he be sure that this strange 
monk wasn't deceiving him completely? Although he spoke eloquently, it could 
be that he was completely insane. Could he be a friend of Takezo's, an 
accomplice? Might he know where the man was hiding? Even if he didn't, which 
was likely at this stage, there was no harm in leading him on, just to see whether 
he'd go through with this crazy scheme. He'd probably worm out of it at the last 
minute anyway. With this in mind, the captain nodded his assent. "All right, 
then. If you catch him, you can decide what to do with him. Now, what happens 
if you don't find him in three days?" 
"I'll hang myself from the big cryptomeria tree in the garden." 
Early the next day, the temple's manservant, looking extremely worried, 
came rushing into the kitchen, out of breath and half shouting: "Has Takuan lost 
his mind? I heard he promised to find Takezo himself!" 
Eyes rounded. 
"No!" 
"Not really!" 
"Just how does he plan to do it?" 
Wisecracks and mocking laughter followed, but there was also an 
undercurrent of worried whispering. 

Pagina 82 di 1295

When word reached the temple priest, he nodded sagely and remarked that 
the human mouth is the gateway to catastrophe. 
But the person most genuinely disturbed was Otsu. Only the day before, 
the farewell note from Matahachi had hurt her more than news of his death could 
ever have. She had trusted her fiance and had even been willing to suffer the 
formidable Osugi as a slave-driving mother-in-law for his sake. Who was there 
to turn to now? 
For Otsu, plunged into darkness and despair, Takuan was life's one bright 
spot, her last ray of hope. The day before, weeping alone in the loom shed, she'd 
seized a sharp knife and cut to shreds the kimono cloth into which she'd literally 
woven her soul. She'd also considered plunging the fine blade into her own 
throat. Though she was sorely tempted to do so, Takuan's appearance had finally 
driven that thought from her mind. After soothing her and getting her to agree to 
pour the captain's sake, he'd patted her on the back. She could still feel the 
warmth of his strong hand as he led her out of the loom shed. 
And now he'd made this insane agreement. 
Otsu wasn't nearly as concerned over her own safety as she was over the 
possibility that her only friend in the world might be lost to her because of his 
silly proposal. She felt lost and utterly depressed. Her common sense alone told 
her it was ridiculous to think that she and Takuan could locate Takezo in so short 
a time. 
Takuan even had the audacity to exchange vows with Scraggly Beard 
before the shrine of Hachiman, the god of war. After he returned, she took him 
severely to task for his rashness, but he insisted there was nothing to worry 
about. His intention, he said, was to relieve the village of its burden, to make 
travel on the highways safe once more and to prevent any further waste of 
human life. In view of the number of lives that could be saved by quickly 
apprehending Takezo, his own seemed unimportant, she must see that. He also 
told her to get as much rest as she could before the evening of the following day, 
when they would depart. She was to come along without complaint, trusting in 
his judgment completely. Otsu was too distraught to resist, and the alternative of 
staying behind and worrying was even worse than the thought of going. 
Late the following afternoon, Takuan was still napping with the cat in the 
corner of the main temple building. Otsu's face was hollow. The priest, the 
manservant, the acolyte—everybody had tried to persuade her not to go. "Go and 
hide" was their practical advice, but Otsu, for reasons she herself could hardly 
fathom, didn't feel the least inclined to do so. 
The sun was sinking fast, and the dense shadows of evening had begun to 

Pagina 83 di 1295

envelop the crevices in the mountain range that marked the course of the Aida 
River. The cat sprang down from the temple porch, and presently Takuan himself 
stepped onto the veranda. Like the cat before him, he stretched his limbs, with a 
great yawn. 
"Otsu," he called, "we'd better get going." 
"I've already packed everything—straw sandals, walking sticks, leggings, 
medicine, paulownia-oil paper." 
"You forgot something." 
"What? A weapon? Should we take a sword or a lance or something?" 
"Certainly not! I want to take along a supply of food." 
"Oh, you mean some box lunches?" 
"No, good food. I want some rice, some salty bean paste and—oh, yes—a 
little sake. Anything tasty will do. I also need a pot. Go to the kitchen and make 
up a big bundle. And get a pole to carry it with." 
The nearby mountains were now blacker than the best black lacquer, those 
in the distance paler than mica. It was late spring, and the breeze was perfumed 
and warm. Striped bamboo and wisteria vines entrapped the mist, and the farther 
Takuan and Otsu went from the village, the more the mountains, where every 
leaf shone faintly in the dim light, seemed to have been bathed by an evening 
shower. They walked through the darkness in single file, each shouldering an 
end of the bamboo pole from which swung their well-packed bundle. 
"It's a nice evening for a walk, isn't it, Otsu?" Takuan said, glancing over 
his shoulder. 
"I don't think it's so wonderful," she muttered. "Where are we going, 
anyway?" 
"I'm not quite sure yet," he replied with a slightly pensive air, "but let's go 
on a bit farther." 
"Well, I don't mind walking." 
"Aren't you tired?" 
"No," replied the girl, but the pole obviously hurt her, for every once in a 
while she shifted it from one shoulder to the other. 
"Where is everyone? We haven't seen a soul." 

Pagina 84 di 1295

"The captain didn't show his face at the temple all day today. I bet he 
called the searchers back to the village so we can have three days all to 
ourselves. Takuan, just how do you propose to catch Takezo?" 
"Oh, don't worry. He'll turn up sooner or later." 
"Well, he hasn't turned up for anyone else. But even if he does, what are 
we going to do? With all those men pursuing him for so long, he must be 
desperate by now. He'll be fighting for his life, and he's very strong to begin 
with. My legs start shaking just thinking about it." 
"Careful! Watch your step!" Takuan shouted suddenly. 
"Oh!" Otsu cried in terror, stopping dead in her tracks. "What's the matter? 
Why did you scare me like that?" 
"Don't worry, it's not Takezo. I just want you to watch where you walk. 
There are wisteria-vine and bramble traps all along the side of the road here." 
"The searchers set them there to catch Takezo?" 
"Uh-huh. But if we're not careful, we'll fall into one ourselves." 
"Takuan, if you keep saying things like that I'll be so nervous I won't be 
able to put one foot in front of the other!" 
"What are you worried about? If we do walk into one, I'll fall in first. No 
need for you to follow me." He grinned back at her. "I must say, they went to an 
awful lot of trouble for nothing." After a moment's silence, he added, "Otsu, 
doesn't the ravine seem to be getting narrower?" 
"I don't know, but we passed the back side of Sanumo some time ago. This 
should be Tsujinohara." 
"If that's the case, we may have to walk all night." 
"Well, I don't even know where we're going. Why talk to me about it?" 
"Let's put this down for a minute." After they'd lowered the bundle to the 
ground, Takuan started toward a nearby cliff. 
"Where are you going?" 
"To relieve myself." 
A hundred feet below him, the waters that joined to form the Aida River 

Pagina 85 di 1295

were crashing thunderously from boulder to boulder. The sound roared up to 
him, filling his ears and penetrating his whole being. As he urinated, he gazed at 
the sky as if counting the stars. "Oh, this feels good!" he exulted. "Am I one with 
the universe, or is the universe one with me?" 
"Takuan," called Otsu, "aren't you finished yet? You certainly do take your 
time!" 
Finally he reappeared and explained himself. "While I was about it, I 
consulted the Book of Changes, and now I know exactly what course of action 
we have to take. It's all clear to me now." 
"The Book of Changes? You aren't carrying a book." 
"Not the written one, silly, the one inside me. My very own original Book 
of Changes. It's in my heart or belly or somewhere. While I was standing there, I 
was considering the lay of the land, the look of the water and the condition of the 
sky. Then I shut my eyes, and when I opened them, something said, 'Go to that 
mountain over there.'" He pointed to a nearby peak. 
"Are you talking about Takateru Mountain?" 
"I have no idea what it's called. It's that one, with the level clearing about 
halfway up." 
"People call that Itadori Pasture." 
"Oh, it has a name, does it?" 
When they reached it, the pasture proved to be a small plain, sloping to the 
southeast and affording a splendid view of the surroundings. Farmers usually 
turned horses and cows loose here to graze, but that night not an animal could be 
seen or heard. The stillness was broken only by the warm spring breeze 
caressing the grass. 
"We'll camp here," announced Takuan. "The enemy, Takezo, will fall into 
my hands just as General Ts'ao Ts'ao of Wei fell into the hands of Ch'u-ko 
K'ung-ming." 
As they laid down their load, Otsu inquired, "What are we going to do 
here?" 
"We are going to sit," replied Takuan firmly. 

Pagina 86 di 1295

"How can we catch Takezo by just sitting here?" 
"If you set up nets, you can catch birds on the wing without having to fly 
around yourself." 
"We haven't set up any nets. Are you sure you haven't become possessed by 
a fox or something?" 
"Let's build a fire, then. Foxes are afraid of fire, so if I am I'll soon be 
exorcised." 
They gathered some dry wood, and Takuan built a fire. It seemed to lift 
Otsu's spirits. 
"A good fire cheers a person up, doesn't it?" 
"It warms a person up, that's for sure. Anyway, were you unhappy?" 
"Oh, Takuan, you can see the mood I've been in! And I don't think anyone 
really likes to spend a night in the mountains like this. What would we do if it 
rained right now?" 
"On the way up I saw a cave near the road. We could take shelter there till 
it stopped." 
"That's what Takezo probably does at night and in bad weather, don't you 
think? There must be places like that all over the mountain. That's probably 
where he hides most of the time, too." 
"Probably. He doesn't really have much sense, but he must have enough to 
get in out of the rain." 
She grew pensive. "Takuan, why do the people in the village hate him so 
much?" 
"The authorities make them hate him. Otsu, these people are simple. 
They're afraid of the government, so afraid that if it so decrees, they'll drive 
away their fellow villagers, even their own kin." 
"You mean they only worry about protecting their own skins." 
"Well, it's not really their fault. They're completely powerless. You have to 
forgive them for putting their own interests first, since it's a case of self-defense. 
What they really want is just to be left alone." 
"But what about the samurai? Why are they making such a fuss about an 

Pagina 87 di 1295

insignificant person like Takezo?" 
"Because he's a symbol of chaos, an outlaw. They have to preserve the 
peace. After Sekigahara, Takezo was obsessed with the idea that the enemy was 
chasing him. He made his first big mistake by breaking through the barrier at the 
border. He should've used his wits somehow, snuck through at night or gone 
through in disguise. Anything. But not Takezo! He had to go and kill a guard and 
then kill other people later on. After that it just snowballed. He thinks he has to 
keep on killing to protect his own life. But he's the one who started it. The whole 
unfortunate situation was brought about by one thing: Takezo's complete lack of 
common sense." 
"Do you hate him too?" 
"I loathe him! I abhor his stupidity! If I were lord of the province, I'd have 
him suffer the worst punishment I could devise. In fact, as an object lesson to the 
people, I'd have him torn limb from limb. After all, he's no better than a wild 
beast, is he? A provincial lord cannot afford to be generous with the likes of 
Takezo, even if he does seem to some to be no more than a young ruffian. It 
would be detrimental to law and order, and that's not good, particularly in these 
unsettled times." 
"I always thought you were kind,. Takuan, but deep down you're quite 
hard, aren't you? I didn't think you cared about the daimyo's laws." 
"Well, I do. I think that good should be rewarded and evil punished, and I 
came here with the authority to do just that." 
"Oh, what was that?" cried Otsu, jumping up from her place by the fire. 
"Didn't you hear it? It was a rustling sound, like footsteps, in those trees over 
there!" 
"Footsteps?" Takuan, too, became alert, but after listening closely for a 
few moments he burst into laughter. "Ha, ha. It's only some monkeys. Look!" 
They could see the silhouettes of a big monkey and a little one, swinging 
through the trees. 
Otsu, visibly relieved, sat down again. "Whew, that scared me half to 
death!" 
For the next couple of hours, the two sat silently, staring at the fire. 
Whenever it would dwindle, Takuan would break some dry branches and throw 
them on. 
"Otsu, what are you thinking about?" 

Pagina 88 di 1295

"Me?" 
"Yes, you. Although I do it all the time, I really hate holding conversations 
with myself." 
Otsu's eyes were puffy from the smoke. Looking up at the starry sky, she 
spoke softly. "I was thinking of how strange the world is. All those stars way up 
there in the empty blackness— No, I don't mean that. 
"The night is full. It seems to embrace everything. If you stare at the stars a 
long time, you can see them moving. Slowly, slowly moving. I can't help 
thinking the whole world is moving. I feel it. And I'm just a little speck in it all 
—a speck controlled by some awesome power I can't even see. Even while I sit 
here thinking, my fate is changing bit by bit. My thoughts seem to go round and 
round in circles." 
"You're not telling the truth!" said Takuan sternly. "Of course those ideas 
entered your head, but you really had something much more specific on your 
mind." 
Otsu was silent. 
"I apologize if I violated your privacy, Otsu, but I read those letters you 
received." 
"You did? But the seal wasn't broken!" 
"I read them after finding you in the loom shed. When you said you didn't 
want them, I stuck them in my sleeve. I guess it was wrong of me, but later, 
when I was in the privy, I took them out and read them just to pass the time." 
"You're awful! How could you do such a thing! And just to pass the time!" 
"Well, for whatever reason. Anyway, now I understand what started that 
flood of tears. Why you looked half dead when I found you. But listen, Otsu, I 
think you were lucky. In the long run, I think it's better that things turned out the 
way they did. You think I'm awful? Look at him!" 
"What do you mean?" 
"Matahachi was and still is irresponsible. If you married him, and then one 
day he surprised you with a letter like that, what would you do then? Don't tell 
me, I know you. You'd dive into the sea from a rocky cliff. I'm glad it's all over 

Pagina 89 di 1295

before it could come to that." 
"Women don't think that way." 
"Oh, really? How do they think?" 
"I'm so angry I could scream!" She tugged angrily at the sleeve of her 
kimono with her teeth. "Someday I'll find him! I swear I will! I won't rest until 
I've told him, to his face, exactly what I think of him. And the same goes for that 
Oko woman." 
She broke into tears of rage. As Takuan stared at her, he mumbled 
cryptically, "It's started, hasn't it?" 
She looked at him dumbfounded. "What?" 
He stared at the ground, seemingly composing his thoughts. Then he 
began. "Otsu, I'd really hoped that you, of all people, would be spared the evils 
and duplicities of this world. That your sweet, innocent self would go through all 
the stages of life unsullied and unharmed. But it looks like the rough winds of 
fate have begun to buffet you, as they buffet everyone else." 
"Oh, Takuan! What should I do! I'm so . . . so . . . angry!" Her shoulders 
shook with her sobbing as she buried her face in her lap. 
By dawn, she'd cried herself out, and the two of them hid in the cave to 
sleep. That night they kept watch by the fire and slept through the next day in the 
cave again. They had plenty of food, but Otsu was baffled. She kept saying she 
couldn't see how they'd ever capture Takezo at this rate. Takuan, on the other 
hand, remained sublimely unperturbed. Otsu hadn't a clue to what he was 
thinking. He made no move to search anywhere, nor was he the slightest bit 
disconcerted by Takezo's failure to appear. 
On the evening of the third day, as on the previous nights, they kept vigil by 
the fireside. 
"Takuan," Otsu finally blurted, "this is our last night, you know. Our time is 
up tomorrow." 
"Hmm. That's true, isn't it?" 
"Well, what do you plan to do?" 
"Do about what?" 
"Oh, don't be so difficult! You do remember, don't you, the promise you 
made to the captain?" 

Pagina 90 di 1295

"Why, yes, of course!" 
"Well, if we don't bring Takezo back—" 
He interrupted her. "I know, I know. I'll have to hang myself from the old 
cryptomeria tree. But don't worry. I'm not ready to die just yet." 
"Then why don't you go and look for him?" 
"If I did, do you really think I'd find him? In these mountains?" 
"Oh, I don't understand you at all! And yet somehow, just sitting here, I feel 
like I'm getting braver, mustering up the nerve to let things turn out 
whatever 
way they will." She laughed. "Or maybe I'm just going crazy, like you." 
"I'm not crazy. I just have nerve. That's what it takes." 
"Tell me, Takuan, was it nerve and nothing else that made you take this 
on?" 
"Yes." 
"Nothing but nerve! That's not very encouraging. I thought you must have 
some foolproof scheme up your sleeve." 
Otsu had been on her way toward sharing her companion's confidence, but 
his disclosure that he was operating on sheer audacity sent her into a fit of 
despondency. Was he totally insane? Sometimes people who are not quite right 
in the mind are taken by others to be geniuses. Takuan might be one of those. 
Otsu was beginning to think this was a distinct possibility. 
The monk, serene as ever, continued to gaze absently into the fire. 
Presently he mumbled, as though he'd just noticed, "It's very late, isn't it?" 
"It certainly is! It'll be dawn soon, " snapped Otsu with deliberate tartness. 
Why had she trusted this suicidal lunatic? 
Paying no attention to the sharpness of her response, he muttered, "Funny, 
isn't it?" 
"What are you muttering about, Takuan?" 
"It just occurred to me that Takezo has to show up pretty soon." 
"Yes, but maybe he doesn't realize you two have an appointment." Looking 

Pagina 91 di 1295

at the monk's unsmiling face, she softened. "Do you really think he will?" 
"Of course I do!" 
"But why would he just walk right into a trap?" 
"It's not exactly that. It has to do with human nature, that's all. People 
aren't strong at heart, they're weak. And solitude is not their natural state, 
particularly when it involves being surrounded by enemies and chased with 
swords. You may think it's natural, but I'd be very much surprised if Takezo 
manages to resist the temptation to pay us a call and warm himself by the fire." 
"Isn't that just wishful thinking? He may be nowhere near here." 
Takuan shook his head and said, "No, it is not just wishful thinking. It isn't 
even my own theory, it's that of a master of strategy." He spoke so confidently 
that Otsu found herself relieved that his disagreement was so definite. 
"I suspect that Shimmen Takezo is somewhere very close by, but hasn't yet 
decided whether we're friends or enemies. He's probably plagued, poor boy, by a 
multitude of doubts, struggling with them, unable to advance or retreat. It'd be 
my guess he's hiding in the shadows right now, looking out at us furtively, 
wondering desperately what to do. Ah, I know. Let me have the flute you carry 
in your obi!" 
"My bamboo flute?" 
"Yes, let me play it for a while." 
"No. Impossible. I never let anyone touch it." 
"Why?" Takuan insisted. 
"Never mind why!" she cried with a shake of her head. 
"What harm would it do to let me use it? Flutes improve the more they're 
played. I won't hurt it." 
"But..." Otsu clasped her right hand firmly on the flute in her obi. 
She always carried it next to her body, and Takuan knew how much she 
treasured the instrument. He had never imagined, however, she would refuse to 
let him play it. 
"I really won't break it, Otsu. I've handled dozens of flutes. Oh, come now, 

Pagina 92 di 1295

at least let me hold it." 
"No." 
"Whatever happens?" 
"Whatever happens." 
"You're stubborn!" 
"Okay, I'm stubborn." 
Takuan gave up. "Well, I'd just as soon listen to you play it. Will you play 
me just one little piece?" 
"I don't want to do that either." 
"Why not?" 
"Because I'd start to cry, and I can't play the flute when I'm crying." 
"Hmm," mused Takuan. While he felt pity for this obstinate tenacity, so 
characteristic of orphans, he was aware of a void deep within their stubborn 
hearts. They seemed to him doomed to yearn desperately for that which they 
could not have, for the parental love with which they were never blessed. 
Otsu was constantly calling out to the parents she'd never known, and they 
to her, but she had no firsthand knowledge of parental love. The flute was the 
only thing her parents had left her, the only image of them she'd ever had. When, 
barely old enough to see the light of day, she'd been left like an abandoned kitten 
on the porch of the Shippoji, the flute had been tucked in her tiny obi. It was the 
one and only link that might in the future enable her to seek out people of her 
own blood. Not only was it the image, it was the voice of the mother and father 
she'd never seen. 
"So she cries when she plays it!" thought Takuan. "No wonder she's so 
reluctant to let anyone handle it, or even to play it herself." He felt sorry for her. 
On this third night, for the first time, a pearly moon shimmered in the sky, 
now and then dissolving behind misty clouds. The wild geese that always 
migrate to Japan in fall and go home in spring were apparently on their way back 
north; occasionally their quacking reached them from among the clouds. 

Pagina 93 di 1295

Rousing himself from his reverie, Takuan said, "The fire's gone down, 
Otsu. Would you put some more wood on it? . . . Why, what's the matter? Is 
something wrong?" 
Otsu didn't answer. 
"Are you crying?" 
Still she said nothing. 
"I'm sorry I reminded you of the past. I didn't mean to upset you." 
"It's nothing," she whispered. "I shouldn't have been so stubborn. Please 
take the flute and play it." She brought the instrument out from her obi and 
offered it to him across the fire. It was in a wrapper of old, faded brocade; the 
cloth was worn, the cords tattered, but there still remained a certain antique 
elegance. 
"May I look at it?" asked Takuan. 
"Yes, please do. It doesn't matter anymore." 
"But why don't you play it instead of me? I think I really would rather 
listen. I'll just sit here like this." He turned sideways and clasped his arms around 
his knees. 
"A11 right. I'm not very good," she said modestly, "but I'll try." 
She knelt in formal fashion on the grass, straightened her kimono collar 
and bowed to the flute laying before her. Takuan said no more. He seemed no 
longer to even be there; there was only the great lonely universe enveloped in 
night. The monk's shadowy form might well have been a rock that had rolled 
down from the hillside and settled on the plain. 
Otsu, her white face turned slightly to one side, put the cherished heirloom 
to her lips. As she wetted the mouthpiece and prepared herself inwardly to play, 
she seemed a different Otsu altogether, an Otsu embodying the strength and 
dignity of art. Turning to Takuan, she once again, in proper fashion, disavowed 
any claim to skill. He nodded perfunctorily. 
The liquid sound of the flute began. As the girl's thin fingers moved over 
the seven holes of the instrument, her knuckles looked like tiny gnomes 
absorbed in a slow dance. It was a low sound, like the gurgling of a brook. 
Takuan felt that he himself had turned into flowing water, splashing through a 

Pagina 94 di 1295

ravine, playing in the shallows. When the high notes sounded, he felt his spirit 
wafted into the sky to gambol with the clouds. The sound of earth and the 
reverberations of heaven mingled and were transformed into the wistful sighs of 
the breeze blowing through the pines, lamenting the impermanence of this 
world. 
As he listened raptly, his eyes closed, Takuan could not help but recall the 
legend of Prince Hiromasa, who, while strolling on a moonlit night at Suzaku 
Gate in Kyoto and playing his flute as he walked, heard another flute 
harmonizing with his. The prince searched out the player and found him in the 
upper story of the gate. Having exchanged flutes, the two played music together 
throughout the night. Only later did the prince discover that his companion had 
been a devil in human form. 
"Even a devil," thought Takuan, "is moved by music. How much more 
deeply must a human being, subject to the five passions, be affected by the 
sound of the flute in the hands of this beautiful girl!" He wanted to weep but 
shed no tears. His face sank deeper between his knees, which he unconsciously 
hugged more tightly. 
As the light from the fire gradually faded, Otsu's cheeks turned a deeper 
red. She was so absorbed in her music that it was difficult to distinguish her from 
the instrument she was playing. 
Was she calling to her mother and father? Were these sounds ascending 
into the sky really asking, "Where are you?" And was there not mingled with this 
plea the bitter resentment of a maiden who'd been deserted and betrayed by a 
faithless man? 
She seemed intoxicated by the music, overwhelmed by her own emotions. 
Her breathing began to show signs of fatigue; tiny beads of sweat appeared 
around the edges of her hair. Tears flowed down her face. Though the melody 
was broken by stifled sobs, it seemed to go on and on forever. 
And then suddenly there was a movement in the grass. It was no more than 
fifteen or twenty feet from the fire and sounded like a creeping animal. Takuan's 
head shot up. Looking straight at the black object, he quietly raised his hand and 
waved a greeting. 
"You over there! It must be chilly in the dew. Come over here by the fire 
and warm yourself. Come and talk with us, please." 
Startled, Otsu stopped playing and said, "Takuan, are you talking to 
yourself again?" 

Pagina 95 di 1295

"Didn't you notice?" he asked, pointing. "Takezo has been over there for 
some time, listening to you play the flute." 
She turned to look, and then, with a shriek, threw her flute at the black 
form. It was indeed Takezo. He jumped like a startled deer and started to flee. 
Takuan, as astonished as Takezo by Otsu's scream, felt as though the net he 
was so carefully hauling in had broken and the fish escaped. Jumping to his feet, 
he called out at the top of his lungs, "Takezo! Stop!" 
There was overpowering strength in his voice, a commanding force that 
could not easily be ignored. The fugitive stopped as though nailed to the ground 
and looked back, a little stupefied. He stared at Takuan with suspicious eyes. 
The monk said no more. Slowly crossing his arms on his chest, he stared 
back at Takezo as steadily as Takezo was staring at him. The two seemed even to 
be breathing in unison. 
Gradually there appeared at the corners of Takuan's eyes the wrinkles that 
mark the beginning of a friendly smile. Unfolding his arms, he beckoned to 
Takezo and said, "Now, come here." 
At the sound of the words, Takezo blinked; a strange expression came over 
his dark face. 
"Come on over here," Takuan urged, "and we can all talk to each other." 
There followed a puzzled silence. 
"There's lots to eat and we even have some sake. We're not your enemies, 
you know. Come over by the fire. Let's talk." 
More silence. 
"Takezo, aren't you making a big mistake? There's a world outside where 
there are fires and food and drink and even human sympathy. You persist in 
driving yourself about in your own private hell. You're taking a pretty warped 
view of the world, you know. 
"But I'll stop trying to argue with you. In your condition, you could hardly 
have much of an ear for reason. Just come over here by the fire. Otsu, warm up 
the potato stew you made a while ago. I'm hungry too." 
Otsu put the pot on the fire, and Takuan placed a jar of sake near the 
flames to heat it. This peaceful scene allayed Takezo's fears, and he inched 
nearer. When he was almost on top of them, he stopped and stood still, 

Pagina 96 di 1295

apparently held back by some inner embarrassment. 
Takuan rolled a rock up near the fire and patted Takezo on the back. "You 
sit here," he said. 
Abruptly, Takezo sat down. Otsu, for her part, couldn't even look her ex¬ 
fiance’s friend in the face. She felt as though she were in the presence of an 
unchained beast. 
Takuan, lifting the lid of the pot, said, "It seems to be ready." He stuck the 
tips of his chopsticks into a potato, drew it out, and popped it into his mouth. 
Chewing heartily, he proclaimed, "Very nice and tender. Won't you have some, 
Takezo?" 
Takezo nodded and for the first time grinned, showing a set of perfect 
white teeth. Otsu filled a bowl and gave it to him, whereupon he began 
alternately to blow on the hot stew and slurp it up in big mouthfuls. His hands 
trembled and his teeth clattered against the edge of the bowl. Pitifully hungry as 
he was, the trembling was uncontrollable. Frighteningly so. 
"Good, isn't it?" asked the monk, putting down his chopsticks. "How about 
some sake?" 
"I don't want any sake." 
"Don't you like it?" 
"I don't want any now." After all that time in the mountains, he was afraid it 
might make him sick. 
Presently he said, politely enough, "Thank you for the food. I'm warmed up 
now." 
"Have you had enough?" 
"Plenty, thank you." As he handed his bowl back to Otsu, he asked, "Why 
did you come up here? I saw your fire last night too." 
The question startled Otsu and she had no answer ready, but Takuan came 
to the rescue by saying forthrightly, "To tell the truth, we came here to capture 
you." 
Takezo showed no particular surprise, though he seemed hesitant to take 
what Takuan had said at face value. He hung his head in silence, then looked 
from one to the other of them. 
Takuan saw that the time had come to act. Turning to face Takezo directly, 
he said, "How about it? If you're going to be captured anyway, wouldn't it be 

Pagina 97 di 1295

better to be tied up with the bonds of the Buddha's Law? The daimyo's 
regulations are law, and the Buddha's Law is law, but of the two, the bonds of the 
Buddha are the more gentle and humane." 
"No, no!" said Takezo, shaking his head angrily. 
Takuan continued mildly. "Just listen for a minute. I understand that you 
are determined to hold out to the death, but in the long run, can you really win?" 
"What do you mean, can I win?" 
"I mean, can you successfully hold out against the people who hate you, 
against the laws of the- province and against your own worst enemy, yourself?" 
"Oh, I know I've already lost," groaned Takezo. His face was sadly 
contorted and his eyes brimmed with tears. "I'll be cut down in the end, but 
before I am I'll kill the old Hon'iden woman and the soldiers from Himeji and all 
the other people I hate! I'll kill as many as I can!" 
"What will you do about your sister?" 
"Huh?" 
"Ogin. What are you going to do about her? She's locked up in the stockade 
at Hinagura, you know!" 
Despite his earlier resolve to rescue her, Takezo could not answer. 
"Don't you think you should start considering the well-being of that good 
woman? She's done so much for you. And what about your duty to carry on the 
name of your father, Shimmen Munisai? Have you forgotten that it goes back 
through the Hirata family to the famous Akamatsu clan of Harima?" 
Takezo covered his face with his blackened, now nearly clawed hands, his 
sharp shoulders piercing upward as they shook in his haggard, trembling body. 
He broke into bitter sobs. "I. . . I. . . don't know. What. . . what difference does 
it make now?" 
At that, Takuan suddenly clenched his fist and let go with a solid punch to 
Takezo's jaw. 
"Fool!" the monk's voice thundered. 

Pagina 98 di 1295

Taken by surprise, Takezo reeled from the blow and before he could recover 
took another punch on the other side. 
"You irresponsible oaf! You stupid ingrate! Since your father and mother 
and ancestors are not here to punish you, I'll do it for them. Take that!" The 
monk struck him again, this time knocking him all the way to the ground. "Does 
it hurt yet?" he asked belligerently. 
"Yes, it hurts," the fugitive whined. 
"Good. If it hurts, you may still have a little human blood coursing through 
your veins. Otsu, hand me that rope, please. . . . Well, what are you waiting for? 
Bring me the rope! Takezo already knows I'm going to tie him up. He's prepared 
for it. It's not the rope of authority, it's the rope of compassion. There's no reason 
for you to either fear or pity him. Quick, girl, the rope!" 
Takezo lay still on his stomach, making no effort to move. Takuan easily 
straddled his back. If Takezo had wanted to resist, he could have kicked Takuan 
in the air like a little paper ball. They both knew that. Yet he lay passively, arms 
and legs outstretched, as though he'd finally surrendered to some invisible law of 
nature.
